Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

A quantitative analysis of bank lending relationships(cid:73)
Kyle Dempsey a
a The Ohio State University, United States
b Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, United States

, Miguel Faria-e-Castro b,∗

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We study the aggregate consequences of dynamic lending relationships in a model of heterogeneous banks 
facing financial frictions. We estimate the model’s loan demand system on administrative loan-level data: the 
market power implied by the estimated strength and persistence of relationships yields a long run reduction 
in credit of 5.9%. Relationships amplify the negative real effects of credit supply shocks, but mute those of 
negative credit demand shocks. In a financial crisis which destroys 25% of bank net worth, for example, 
loan volume drops more than twice as much in our baseline model than in a competitive analog with no 
relationships, but banks recapitalize faster.

Dataset link: A Quantitative Analysis of Bank L
ending Relationships (Dempsey and Faria-e-Cas
tro) (Original data)

JEL classification:
E44
G21

Keywords:
Banking
Lending relationships
Aggregate dynamics

1. Introduction

Banks  operate  in  imperfectly  competitive  markets  in  their  core 
business activities: deposit taking and loan making.1 Market power 
generates  economic  profits  for  banks  by  enabling  them  to  lend  at 
interest rates above the fair (risk-adjusted) cost of capital and borrow at 
interest rates below the prevailing risk-free rate.2 This paper studies the 
implications of one source of banks’ lending market power: long-lasting 
lending relationships with borrowers. We develop a model in which 
these relationships introduce dynamic incentives into banks’ lending 
and financing decisions. Specifically, banks internalize the fact that 
while charging higher interest rates may generate larger profits today, 
it may also erode relationships and thereby worsen lending prospects 
tomorrow. The central focus of this paper is to quantify the aggregate
consequences  of  banks’  lending  relationships  by  showing  how  they 

interact with financial frictions at the individual bank and banking 
industry levels.

We study lending relationships in a dynamic equilibrium model 
with heterogeneous banks subject to financial constraints, as in Corbae 
and D’Erasmo (2021) or Bigio and Bianchi (2022). We model lending 
relationships in a parsimonious way using two key features. First, a 
borrower may borrow from many banks, but faces costs of adjusting 
the share of its total lending sourced from each bank. These adjustment 
costs endow lenders with market power. The adjustment is relative to 
‘‘relationship capital’’, which summarizes borrowers’ prior loan sourc-
ing decisions in a manner akin to a ‘‘deep habit’’ (Ravn et al., 2006). In 
this setup, stronger relationships generate higher levels and lower price 
elasticities of loan demand for individual banks. Likewise, a borrower’s 
total loan demand depends not only on loan interest rates (or a sum-
mary statistic of the economy-wide distribution of rates), but on the 

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. This article was previously circulated under the title ‘‘A Quantitative Theory of Relationship Lending.’’ We thank 
Asha Bharadwaj for research assistance with the data, and Mike Carter and Jeongwoo Moon for research assistance with computation. We thank the editor as well 
as seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Richmond, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, Queen Mary University of London, London Business School, Bank of Portugal, Nova SBE, and conference 
participants at the 2021 Society for Economic Dynamics, 2021 CEBRA, and the 2021 Econometric Society Winter Meetings for helpful comments. First version: 
February 2020. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis or the Federal 
Reserve System.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  dempsey.164@osu.edu (K. Dempsey), miguel.fariaecastro@stls.frb.org (M. Faria-e-Castro).

1 See, for example, Berger and Hannan (1998). Banking industry concentration and market power is well documented both internationally (Fernández de 
Guevara et al., 2005) and in the U.S., which has experienced a stark secular decline in the number of banks over the last several decades (Prescott and Janicki, 
2006).

2 Such economic profits have long been considered a ‘‘feature, not a bug’’, as they generate franchise value that curbs risk-taking by banks, thereby promoting 

financial stability (Demsetz et al., 1996).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104083
Received 27 August 2024; Received in revised form 20 April 2025; Accepted 24 April 2025
Available online 9 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

full joint distribution of rates and relationships across lenders. Second, 
whether a borrower’s relationship with a given bank strengthens or 
weakens period-to-period depends on the bank’s pricing decision. Thus, 
banks’ market power is dynamic: banks extract rents commensurate 
with the inverse elasticity of loan demand (like static monopolists), but 
these rents are extracted over the life of the relationship.

For clarity, we note from the outset that we do not aim to provide 
a fundamental theory of the origins and evolution of borrower–lender 
relationships.  Rather,  we  seek  to  provide  a  quantitatively  tractable 
and empirically-disciplined framework capable of analyzing how the 
existence of such relationships shapes banks’ behavior, and, in turn, 
the nature and dynamics of lending markets and the banking industry. 
In this context, our paper makes four main contributions.

First,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  our  model  is  the  first  that 
can  be  used  to  evaluate  how  lending  relationships  shape  banking-
industry-level  and  aggregate  outcomes  in  the  presence  of  financial 
constraints. Importantly, our framework nests a competitive benchmark 
in which borrowers do not face loan portfolio adjustment costs. In this 
benchmark, there is no notion of relationships, banks take prices as 
given, and they choose loan volumes while making the same set of 
financing decisions as in our baseline model. This nesting property 
allows us to detail quantitatively how the presence of relationships alter 
bank behavior.

Second, we show that two of the key parameters that govern lending 
relationships in the model can be directly estimated without solving 
the full model using loan-level micro-data. This involves combining the 
law of motion for relationships at the bank level with the individual 
firm demand for credit from that bank. We then adapt the method 
of Amiti and Weinstein (2018) to estimate the model-implied bank-
level demand curve. This yields estimates of both the static interest rate 
elasticity of loan demand, which pins down the level of loan portfolio 
adjustment costs, and the dynamic impact of banks’ market shares on 
how relationships and loan demand evolve. This leverages the fact that, 
through the lens of our model, relationship capital is the key non-price 
shifter of loan demand. The ability to estimate the demand system 
directly keeps our quantitative analysis tractable, and is therefore a key 
benefit of our approach to modeling relationships.

Third, we show that financial and relationship capital are comple-
ments. Fixing relationship capital, more financially constrained banks 
tend  to  charge  higher  interest  rates  and  ration  lending  to  increase 
profitability, which comes at the expense of relationship capital. Fixing 
financial capital, banks with weaker relationships tend to charge lower
interest rates to boost lending and build relationships for the future, 
which  comes  at  the  expense  of  financial  capital.  Despite  charging 
lower rates, though, these ‘‘relationship constrained’’ banks lend less 
in terms of quantities than banks with stronger relationships, as they 
face weaker demand. Therefore, banks with stronger relationships hold 
more financial capital to meet the stronger loan demand they face. 
These forces combine to deliver a strong positive correlation between 
financial and relationship capital (0.89), and smaller but positive corre-
lations of spreads with both financial and relationship capital (0.35 and 
0.59, respectively). Increasing banks’ static or dynamic market power 
strengthens these correlations.

We perform two key analyses which simultaneously demonstrate 
the model’s key mechanisms and validate its quantitative performance 
along untargeted dimensions. First, we show that our model matches 
the empirical profile of spreads over the life of a lending relationship. 
This establishes that banks in our model have realistically strong and 
persistent market power. In the data, on average, ‘‘switching loans’’ are 
priced below market in the first year of a new lending relationship, but 
then above market over the next year and a half. Our baseline model 
matches this pattern. Moreover, we show that this is a direct function of 
the estimated strength and persistence of relationships: decreasing the 
static demand elasticity causes banks to raise rates too quickly, while 
making relationships more persistent induces them to raise rates too 
high later in the relationship.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Next, we show that the distribution of banks’ capital buffers in our 
baseline economy lines up well with the empirical distribution. This 
matters because relationships have an ex ante ambiguous effect on 
capital buffers. On one hand, banks can expend relationship capital to 
weather financial shocks by charging high interest rates, dampening 
any precautionary motives. On the other, the high profits associated 
with lending at higher rates increase banks’ franchise values, strength-
ening precautionary motives. Our baseline model balances these forces 
in line with the data, while the alternatives we consider all err on the 
side of too-small capital buffers. This gap is driven by lower franchise 
values in a more competitive economy, while it is driven by the ease 
with  which  banks  can  increase  loan  rates  in  the  face  of  financial 
constraints in less competitive economies.

Our fourth main contribution is to show that relationship lending 
plays an important role in determining how the economy responds to 
aggregate shocks. In response to a large aggregate financial shock in 
which all banks lose a fraction of their equity, lending relationships 
amplify the initial contraction in the credit market and slow the recov-
ery. This is driven by a faster recapitalization in the banking sector, 
as banks exploit their relationships to rebuild financial capital. This 
amplification is significant: the drop in lending in response to a 25% 
negative shock to bank net worth in the relationship economy is over 
twice as large as the corresponding drop in the competitive benchmark.
We also study how relationship lending impacts the response to 
shocks to credit demand. In a competitive economy, banks react to 
a fall in credit demand by trimming their balance sheets, contracting 
both deposits and net worth. In the relationship economy, on the other 
hand, banks’ additional incentive to maintain relationships leads them 
to reduce interest rates substantially. While this props up loan volume, 
it also results in a fall in net worth that is over twice as large as, and 
more persistent than, the one observed in the competitive economy.

Finally, we study how relationships affect the response to shocks to 
bank funding costs (e.g. from a monetary tightening). Similar to the 
financial shock, the presence of relationships helps mute the effects of 
the shock on loan volumes and the price of credit. The increase in the 
cost of deposits and the incentive to maintain loan volumes to prevent 
relationship deterioration induces banks to substitute retained earnings 
for deposits as a source of financing. Thus shocks to the cost of funding 
cause a persistent increase in aggregate bank capital in the relationship 
economy.

Importantly, in addition to comparing our baseline model to a com-
petitive alternative for each aggregate shock, we also compare it to a 
‘‘fixed relationship’’ economy in which the overall level and distribution 
of static market power is the same as in the baseline economy, but 
relationships are permanent. In this case, despite having market power, 
banks lack the dynamic incentives to maintain their relationships just 
as in the competitive economy: therefore, the real effects of each of 
these shocks for this version of the model more closely resembles the 
competitive case than the baseline relationship case. This highlights the 
importance of the dynamic nature of lending relationships.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The remainder of 
this section discusses our paper’s context in the relevant literatures. 
Section 2 documents two key empirical observations which motivate 
our approach to modeling lending relationships. Section 3 presents our 
model environment. Section 4 describes how we take our model to the 
data. Sections 5 and 6 present the main results from our quantitative 
model, with the former focusing on the cross-section and the latter 
focusing on aggregate dynamics. Section 7 concludes and describes 
some promising areas for future research.

Related literature.  This paper contributes to three distinct literatures in 
macroeconomics and finance: (i) customer capital in macroeconomic 
models; (ii) structural models of banking; and (iii) empirical studies of 
the effects of bank market power.

While the dynamics of customer capital can be related to an older 
literature on consumption habits, Gourio and Rudanko (2014) provide 

2 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

a seminal formalization of customer capital in a macroeconomic model 
which we adapt here. Focusing on nonfinancial firms, Gilchrist et al. 
(2017) argue that the interaction between customer capital dynamics 
and financial constraints helps explain inflation dynamics in the U.S. 
during the Great Recession. We model customer capital dynamics with 
heterogeneous agents similarly, but with a special focus on how cus-
tomer capital interacts with financial constraints specific to the banking 
industry. This is critical to understanding recent recessions, since the 
aggregate capitalization of the banking sector has been argued to be 
a relevant state variable for macroeconomic performance (Adrian and 
Boyarchenko, 2012).

The heterogeneous banks in our model take deposits, make loans, 
and  face  constraints  that  depend  on  their  net  worth.  We  therefore 
contribute to an emerging literature that employs the tools of hetero-
geneous agent macroeconomic models to study the banking industry. 
Bigio  and  Bianchi  (2022)  incorporate  liquidity  frictions  in  the  in-
terbank market to study monetary policy implementation. In Corbae 
and D’Erasmo (2021), the correlation between bank size and market 
power affects the impacts of capital requirements. Taking the regula-
tory regime as given, we study how lending relationships affect the 
overall stability of the banking system. We use our model to study 
aggregate dynamics similarly to Neri et al. (2010), who introduce a 
monopolistically competitive banking sector in an otherwise standard 
monetary DSGE model to study the transmission of standard shocks. 
Wang et al. (2022) also develop a structural model of banking to study 
how market power affects the transmission of monetary policy shocks. 
Boualam  (2018)  studies  how  credit  relationships  are  endogenously 
formed and persist in a setting with search and agency frictions.

Finally,  our  paper  relates  to  a  broader  empirical  literature  that 
studies the efficiency and stability consequences of banking market 
power and concentration. Recent work on this topic has been focused 
on market power in the deposits market. Egan et al. (2017) use detailed 
branch-level data on deposit quantities and prices to estimate a demand 
system for deposits at large U.S. banks. They combine these estimates 
with  a  dynamic  model  of  bank  runs  to  study  the  probabilities  of 
counterfactual runs on these large banks. Drechsler et al. (2017) argue 
that bank market power in the deposit markets gives rise to a new 
channel of transmission for monetary policy in the U.S. Our notion of 
customer capital in banking is also related to traditional views on bank 
franchise value, and the idea that regulatory barriers and market power 
generate enterprise value beyond the pure accounting value of bank 
assets and liabilities (Atkeson et al., 2019).

We  focus  on  market  power  on  the  loan  side  of  banks’  balance 
sheets.  Lending  relationships  are  a  form  of  bank  customer  capital, 
which gives individual banks a degree of market power. It has been 
widely documented that banks value long-lived relationships (Petersen 
and Rajan, 1994). For example, Berger and Udell (1995) find that banks 
smooth loan rates when faced with adverse shocks to funding costs, and 
that this helps them conserve relationships. Banerjee et al. (2021) find 
similar relationship dynamics using Italian credit registry data around 
the Lehman episode. There is also an extensive theoretical literature 
that derives conditions under which the optimal contract between a 
lender and a borrower shares some of those features under a variety 
of  frictions,  such  as  asymmetric  information  (Diamond,  1984;  Dar-
mouni, 2020) or search frictions and switching costs (Boualam, 2018; 
Payne, 2018). Our approach is closest to this latter strand: modeling 
relationships as deep habits can be interpreted as a reduced-form for 
switching costs. Darmouni (2020), in particular, finds that information 
frictions are unable to account for the stickiness of borrower–lender 
relationships in the U.S. syndicated loan market. We take the lending 
contract and the process for customer capital dynamics as given, and 
study their macroeconomic implications.

2. Empirical motivation

We use loan-level micro data for the U.S. to document two facts 
regarding bank loans: (i) switching between banks is relatively infre-
quent; and (ii) there exists an interest rate life cycle for new lending 
relationships, featuring low interest rates in the beginning that rise over 
the length of the relationship.

2.1. Data

Our main source of data is the Commercial & Industrial loan sched-
ule H.1 of the Federal Reserve’s FR Y-14Q dataset (Y-14 for short). 
This is a quarterly panel of individual loan facilities held in the books 
of the largest bank holding companies (BHCs) in the US.3 The Y-14 
includes all loan facilities held in the books of covered BHCs with 
commitments larger than $1 million. It contains detailed information 
about  the  characteristics  of  each  loan,  such  as  the  identity  of  the 
borrower, the type of loan, interest rate, purpose of loan, etc.

We restrict our loan sample along several dimensions. First, we 
exclude loans to non-US addresses, loans in currencies other than the 
US dollar, and loans to firms without a US Tax Identification Number 
(TIN, our main firm identifier). We also exclude loans to the financial 
and public administration sectors, that is, to any entity classified as a 
bank or with NAICS code 52 or 92.4 Due to their different nature and 
imperfect coverage, we also drop syndicated loans.

2.2. Facts on US bank loan markets

2.2.1. Switching lenders is infrequent

Fig.  1 presents time series plots on the percentage of loans that 
correspond to ‘‘switches’’, as a percentage of total outstanding loans. 
Our  definition  of  ‘‘switch’’  is  adapted  from  Ioannidou  and  Ongena 
(2010): a loan is considered a switch if it is a new loan and originates 
from a bank with whom the firm has had no (observable) relationship 
in the past year. The time series plots show that in terms of both dollar 
value and loan counts, switches are between 2 and 3.5% of total loans. 
Thus switching is relatively infrequent.

It is worth noting that due to the characteristics of the Y-14 dataset, 
we are likely to be overestimating the frequency of switching. First, loan 
observations may enter and/or leave our panel for many reasons other 
than origination or maturity. A loan may have been originated with a 
committed exposure of under $1 million, with a credit limit increase 
above $1 million being renegotiated at a later date. In that case, we 
only observe the loan after the credit limit has increased. Additionally, 
banks may not keep originated loans in their portfolios, for example 
by selling them to other financial institutions. Second, since we only 
observe credit facilities above $1 million dollars, we do not observe 
small firms that borrow lower amounts. It is well documented that 
large firms tend to have more relationships and switch more often than 
smaller ones (Petersen and Rajan, 1994). Among studies that use more 
comprehensive loan-level datasets, Ioannidou and Ongena (2010) find 
that 3% of all originations are classified as switching loans for Bolivia, 
while Farinha and Santos (2002) find that on average 4% of all yearly 
originations involve switching, using data for Portugal. Finally, it is 
worth pointing out that these facts do not seem to be driven by larger 
firms that borrow from multiple banks: Figure A.1 in the Appendix 
repeats the exercise for single-bank firms, and is qualitatively identical.

3 Until 2019, the dataset includes all BHCs with more than $50 billion in 
assets. From 2019 onwards, only BHCs with more than $100 billion in assets 
are included.

4 We also exclude loans made to companies with NAICS codes 5312 (Offices 
of  Real  Estate  Agents  and  Brokers)  or  551 111  (Offices  of  Bank  Holding 
Companies).

3 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Fig. 1.  Switches as a percentage of total outstanding loans. Notes: See text for details. 
A loan is classified as a switch if it is (i) a new loan, and (ii) from a bank with which 
the firm has had no relationship in the past year.

2.2.2. Interest rates first fall, then rise over the life cycle of a relationship

We next investigate how interest rates evolve over the life cycle of 
firm–bank relationships. We follow an approach inspired by Ioannidou 
and Ongena (2010): we first identify loan originations that correspond 
to new relationships (again, defined as the absence of an observable re-
lationship between the borrowing firm and lending bank in the previous 
year),  then  match  those  with  loan  originations  from  existing  rela-
tionships that have similar observed characteristics. More specifically, 
‘‘matched’’ loans are the same with respect to the following observable 
characteristics: (i) loan origination date; (ii) maturity (in years); (iii) 
originating bank; (iv) percentile of loan size; (v) loan type (term loan, 
credit line, or other); (vi) interest rate variability; and (vii) percentile 
of default probability. Since there are more non-switching loans than 
switching loans in our data, we match each unique non-switching loan 
with a similar switching loan, meaning that some switching loans may 
appear multiple times in the dataset. This procedure generates 20,155 
matched loan pairs.

For each pair 𝑝 and date 𝑡, we compute the spread between the 
switching and non-switching loans, 𝑦𝑝,𝑡. We then run regressions of the 
following type: 

𝑦𝑝,𝑡 =

13
∑

𝑖=1

𝛾𝑖𝟏[𝜏𝑝,𝑡 = 𝑖] + 𝜖𝑝,𝑡

(1)

where 𝜏𝑝,𝑡 is time since origination for the matched loan pair 𝑝 at time 
𝑡, measured in quarters. Time since origination can alternatively be 
interpreted as the length of the relationship for the switching loan 
(by  construction,  as  a  switching  loan  is  such  that  no  relationship 
existed beforehand). We interpret the estimated coefficients {𝛾𝑖} as the 
average discount or premium that a switching loan obtains relative to 
a non-switching loan in period 𝑖 of its life cycle.5

Fig.  2 summarizes the estimation results for regression (1), depicting 
the estimated marginal effects along with 90% confidence intervals 
based on robust standard errors. The figure shows that the average 
spread between switching and non-switching loans is negative for most 
of the first year, meaning that switching loans pay lower interest rates 
on  average.  After  one  year,  the  spread  becomes  positive,  meaning 
that switching loans start paying interest rates that are, on average, 
higher than those of non-switchers. This positive spread persists for 
the next 6 quarters, becoming statistically indistinguishable from zero 
thereafter. This life cycle pattern is consistent with the one detected by 
Ioannidou and Ongena (2010) for Bolivia: they also find that switchers 
start out by paying lower interest rates than nonswitchers, but that 

5 We consider 𝑖 = 1, … , 13, where each 𝑖 is a quarter since origination and 

𝑖 = 13 stands for all quarters after 12.

4 

Fig. 2.  Average spread between loans for new and existing relationships. Notes: See 
text for details. At each time since loan origination, the dot represents the point estimate 
of 𝛾𝑖 from (1), and the bars represent the associated 90% confidence interval.

these interest rates increase over time and eventually exceed those of 
non-switchers. The authors use these findings to discriminate between 
alternative theories of firm–bank relationships: these results suggest 
that relationships are influenced by switching costs that give rise to 
a hold-up problem. Thus the bank initially attracts the borrower using 
a ‘‘teaser rate’’, and then exploits the fact that switching is costly to 
extract surplus. The pattern is also in line with of Banerjee et al. (2021), 
who use Italian credit registry data to show that interest rates tend to 
increase with the length of the relationship for different types of loans.
It is worth pointing out that we find spreads of smaller magnitudes 
than Ioannidou and Ongena (2010). This can be explained by many 
factors, including lower average interest rates in the US versus Bolivia 
and the fact that the firms in our sample tend to be larger and safer than 
those in Bolivia. Both forces lead to compression in interest rates across 
firms. The $1 million dollar loan cutoff excludes most small enterprises 
from our sample. As with switching patterns, a very similar pattern 
emerges when focusing on single-bank firms only, shown in Figure A.2 
in the Appendix.

Summary.  Together,  these  facts  suggest  that  aversion  to  switching 
generates a specific form of market power for the lender which evolves 
over the lending relationship. When attracting a new borrower, the 
bank is at a disadvantage relative to any incumbent lenders the bor-
rower has. Conditional on forming a relationship, though, the bank 
gradually develops the advantages of the incumbent, i.e. the ability 
to charge above-market rates. These facts motivate our parsimonious 
specification of lending relationships in the next section, which com-
bines costs of adjusting how borrowers source their loans with banks’ 
internalization of these costs in their pricing decisions.

3. A model of banks with lending relationships

We consider a stationary economy populated by a unit continuum 
of monopolistically competitive banks 𝑗 ∈ [0, 1] and a continuum of 
identical firms 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1] who borrow from them.6 Time is discrete 
and infinite, and there is a single good. The risk-free rate is 𝑟, which 
defines a risk-free discount price of 𝑞 = (1 + 𝑟)−1, the wage rate is 𝑤, 
and the user cost of capital (rental rate) is 𝑢𝑐 = 𝑟 + 𝛿, where 𝛿 is the 
depreciation rate. All these prices are exogenously specified.7 While the 
model’s focus is on bank behavior, described in Section 3.2, we first 
present the firms’ problem in Section 3.1 since it delivers the demand 

6 All firms are identical and there are no idiosyncratic shocks to firms, so 

the model admits a representative firm.

7 It is straightforward to embed our relationship framework into a general 
equilibrium  model.  Since  our  primary  focus  is  on  the  banking  industry, 
however, we simplify the model by keeping these prices exogenous.

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

system banks face and helps introduce notation. Section 3.3 defines 
the equilibrium. Finally, Section 3.4 discusses the motivation for and 
implications of the main assumptions in our framework. Proofs of all 
propositions are contained in Appendix B.

3.1. Firms: defining bank-specific and aggregate loan demand

Firms  operate  a  decreasing  returns  production  technology  using 
labor 𝑛 and capital 𝑘, producing 𝑦 = 𝐴𝑘𝛼𝑛𝜂 units of output for 𝛼, 𝜂, 
and 𝛼 + 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1) given total factor productivity 𝐴. Each period, the 
firm chooses: (i) how much labor and capital to hire; (ii) how much 
to borrow; and (iii) the sourcing of its borrowing across banks 𝑗. The 
firm is subject to a working capital constraint as in Christiano et al. 
(2005): total lending must be at least a fraction 𝜅 ≥ 0 of its total costs, 
which include the wage bill and the costs of renting capital. The firm’s 
total loan demand today is 𝐿′, and the distribution of borrowing across 
banks is ′ = {𝓁′
𝑗 is the face value of this period’s loan from 
bank 𝑗. The discount price of a loan from bank 𝑗 is 𝑞𝑗 , and we denote 
the set of loan prices across banks by  = {𝑞𝑗 }.

𝑗 }, where 𝓁′

We model lending relationships as follows. For each bank 𝑗, we 
summarize the intensity of a firm’s relationship with that bank by 𝑠𝑗 ; 
the set of relationships across all banks is  = {𝑠𝑗 }. We assume it is 
costly for a firm to source its loans in a way that deviates from the 
distribution of relationships. We implement this with a quadratic cost 
function with scale parameter 𝜙 ≥ 0, which penalizes deviations in the 
share of total lending sourced from bank 𝑗 from the (relative) intensity 
of the firm’s relationship with bank 𝑗. For tractability, we assume that 
borrowers take current relationships as given and do not internalize 
how current loan sourcing decisions affect future relationships, in the 
spirit of ‘‘external’’ habits in the literature (e.g. Ravn et al., 2006).

Under this formulation, a firm does not directly care about the 
‘‘identity’’ 𝑗 of any bank from which it borrows; rather, it cares only 
about the intensity of its relationship with the bank, 𝑠, and the loan 
price the bank offers, 𝑞. Therefore, the decision-relevant object which 
defines borrowing opportunities for the firm is the joint density of 
prices and relationships across banks, 𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠), which summarizes {, }. 
The firm’s dynamic optimization problem may then be written recur-
sively as:

𝑊 (; 𝜇) =

max
𝑛,𝑘,𝐿′,{𝓁′(𝑞,𝑠)}

𝐴𝑘𝛼𝑛𝜂 − 𝑤𝑛 − 𝑢𝑐𝑘
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
net operating income

−

∫

𝐿′

( 𝑞𝓁′(𝑞, 𝑠)
𝐿′

𝜙
2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
sourcing adjustment costs

− 1 − (𝑠 − 𝑆)

d𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠)

)2

+ 𝐿′ − ∫ 𝓁(𝑞, 𝑠)d𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
borrowing net of repayments
]
+ 𝑞E [𝑊 (′; 𝜇)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
continuation value

subject to [working capital]

𝜅(𝑤𝑛 + 𝑢𝑐𝑘) ≤ 𝐿′

[loan sourcing]

𝐿′ ≤

∫ 𝑞𝓁′(𝑞, 𝑠)d𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The firm’s flow profits in (2) sum net operating income 𝐴𝑘𝛼𝑛𝜂 −𝑤𝑛−𝑢𝑐𝑘
and net borrowing (new loans less repayments), less adjustment costs. 
𝜇[𝑞𝓁′(𝑞, 𝑠)] = ∫ 𝑞𝓁′(𝑞, 𝑠)d𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠), defined in the loan sourcing 
𝐿′(𝜇) ≡ E
constraint (4), are total funds borrowed today, and 𝑆(𝜇) ≡ E
𝜇𝑠 =
∫ 𝑠d𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠)  is  the  average  relationship  intensity.  The  firm  discounts 
the future at the risk-free rate and recognizes that, in a stationary 
equilibrium, the joint distribution of prices and relationship intensities 
is constant across periods, even if specific banks shift around in the 
distribution. Constraint (3) is the working capital constraint. Note again 
that the borrower does not take into account its choice of loan portfolio 
today on habits tomorrow, hence there is no explicit ‘‘law of motion’’ 
for  𝑠  in  this  problem.  This  reflects  the  externality  of  habits:  each 
individual firm is atomistic and does not internalize the impact of its 
actions on relationships.

Intuitively, these adjustment costs mean that, all else equal, firms 
would like to choose their borrowing shares at each bank in line with 

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

the relative intensity of their relationship with that bank (i.e., 𝑠 relative 
to 𝑆), since this implies no adjustment costs. The quadratic functional 
form is not essential to our results, and it could be seen as a second-
order approximation to a more general adjustment cost function that 
satisfies  certain  restrictions.  We  consider  this  more  general  case  in 
Appendix B.3. The key advantage of the quadratic specification is that it 
gives rise to a linear demand system that is amenable to estimation. The 
following proposition summarizes the loan demand system that arises 
from the firm’s problem: 

Proposition 1 (Loan Demand System).  Given a joint distribution of prices 
and relationship intensities 𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠), bank-specific loan-demand 𝓁′(𝑞, 𝑠) and 
aggregate loan demand 𝐿′ satisfy
𝑞𝓁′(𝑞, 𝑠; 𝜇)
𝐿′(𝜇)

[𝑟(𝑞) − 𝑅(𝜇)]  for all 𝑞, 𝑠

= 1 − 𝑆 + 𝑠 −

𝑞
𝜙

(5)

𝐿′(𝜇) = 𝜅(𝛼 + 𝜂)

( 𝛼
𝑢𝑐

)𝛼 ( 𝜂
𝑤

𝐴

)𝜂

1 + 𝜅(𝑞 ̃𝑅(𝜇) − 1)

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

1
1−𝛼−𝜂

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

(6)

where 𝑟(𝑞) = 𝑞−1 is the interest rate implied by the bank’s loan price, 𝑆 is 
the average relationship intensity, 𝑅(𝜇) = E
𝜇[𝑟(𝑞)] is the average interest 
rate, and  ̃𝑅(𝜇) is the effective interest rate: 

̃𝑅(𝜇) = 𝑅(𝜇) + C

𝜇[𝑟(𝑞), 𝑠] −

𝑞
2𝜙

V

𝜇[𝑟(𝑞)]

(7)

which adjusts the average interest rate for the covariance of interest rates 
and relationship intensities C
𝜇(𝑟, 𝑠), and the overall variance of interest rates 
V

𝜇(𝑟).

Eq. (5) defines the demand curve faced by a bank with relationship 
intensity 𝑠 charging price 𝑞 as a function of aggregate loan demand, 
the average interest rate, and the average relationship intensity. The 
loan demand at a given bank is decreasing in the loan rate spread 
over the benchmark 𝑟(𝑞) − 𝑅(𝜇), with elasticity governed by the risk-
free rate and the adjustment cost. This is a standard price effect: when 
a given bank’s loans are cheap relative to its competition, that bank 
will capture a higher share of total lending, all else equal. Steeper 
adjustment costs (higher 𝜙) imply a lower elasticity of loan demand 
with respect to price. In addition, bank-level loan demand increases 
in the strength of the firm’s relationship with that bank, measured by 
𝑠. Thus, stronger existing lending relationships simultaneously increase 
the level and lower the price elasticity of loan demand, endowing these 
banks with more effective market power.

Eq. (6) determines aggregate loan demand. Conveniently, the en-
tire joint distribution of loan prices and relationship intensities may 
be summarized by a single statistic: the effective interest rate  ̃𝑅(𝜇)
from Eq.  (7). This term has three components. First, the average interest 
rate term 𝑅(𝜇) conveys that when interest rates are higher on average, 
aggregate loan demand is lower. Second, loan demand is dampened fur-
ther when the banks with whom the firm has the strongest relationships 
charge the highest spreads, as indicated by the covariance term C
𝜇(𝑟, 𝑠). 
Third, holding fixed the previous two terms, greater cross-sectional 
interest rate variance, V
𝜇(𝑟), burnishes loan demand by creating scope 
for the firm to gravitate towards cheaper banks.

3.2. Banks: dynamic pricing with relationships and financial constraints

Each  bank  uses  retained  earnings  (its  net  worth),  newly  issued 
equity 𝑒 < 0, and deposits 𝑑′ ≥ 0 (investment in riskless securities if 
𝑑′ < 0) to make loans 𝓁′ at discount price 𝑞. Deposits are risk-free 
(insured) and issued at exogenous price 𝑞𝑑 for all banks. Banks value 
dividends 𝑒 ≥ 0 and face costs of issuing equity: we follow the dynamic 
corporate finance literature and model bank preference for dividends 
via the increasing function 𝜓(𝑒). The value of positive dividends is 
simply  𝜓(𝑒) = 𝑒  when  𝑒 ≥ 0,  but  equity  issuance  (i.e.  negative 
dividends) is costly, with 𝜓 ′(𝑒) > 1 for 𝑒 < 0. Banks’ resources can 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

be shifted by a persistent idiosyncratic shock 𝑧 drawn from an AR(1) 
process 𝛤 (𝑧, 𝑧′) which proxies excess returns on unmodeled sectors of 
banks’ portfolios. Finally, we assume that banks exit with exogenous 
iid probability 1 − 𝜋 for 𝜋 ∈ [0, 1] each period. Exiting banks pay out 
their net worth as a dividend and are replaced with banks with no net 
worth and no relationships.

Banks face a regulatory capital constraint that specifies that the 
total value of equity must exceed a fraction 𝜒 of total lending. We 
assume that each bank is monopolistically competitive, setting its loan 
price while taking as given the bank-specific loan demand function (5), 
as well as the level of aggregate demand and (the key moments of) 
the distribution 𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠) described in Proposition  1. Crucially, individual 
banks internalize the impact of their lending choices today on their 
relationships tomorrow. We assume that relationships build up over 
time  as  a  convex  combination  of  the  current  relationship  intensity 
(coefficient 𝜌𝑠) and the share of total loans issued today (coefficient 
𝜌𝑞).

At the beginning of the period and after the realization of the exit 
shock, a bank’s state is its net worth, 𝑛, relationship intensity, 𝑠, and 
idiosyncratic shock, 𝑧. A bank’s recursive problem is:

𝑉 (𝑛, 𝑠, 𝑧; 𝜇) =

subject to: [budget constraint]
[capital requirement]

[relationship building]

[market power]
[net worth accumulation]

𝜓(𝑒) + 𝑞E [

max
𝑞,𝑒,𝓁′≥0,𝑑′,𝑠′,𝑛′
]
+𝜋𝑉 (𝑛′, 𝑠′, 𝑧′; 𝜇)
𝑞𝓁′ + 𝑒 ≤ 𝑛 + 𝑧 + 𝑞𝑑 𝑑′
𝜒𝑞𝓁′ ≤ 𝑞𝓁′ − 𝑞𝑑 𝑑′
𝑞𝓁′
𝐿′(𝜇)
𝓁′ = 𝓁(𝑞, 𝑠; 𝜇)
𝑛′ = 𝓁′ − 𝑑′

𝑠′ = 𝜌𝑞

+ 𝜌𝑠𝑠

(1 − 𝜋)𝜓(𝑛′)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

The optimal policies are denoted 𝑔𝑦(𝑥) for 𝑦 ∈ {𝑞, 𝑒, 𝓁′, 𝑑′, 𝑠′, 𝑛′}, where 
𝑥 = (𝑛, 𝑠, 𝑧).

The bank’s objective function (8) reflects its present valuation of 
dividends net of issuance costs, discounted at factor 𝑞.8 Banks exit with 
probability 1 − 𝜋, at which point they pay out their net worth as a 
dividend. Constraint (9) is the bank’s flow budget constraint: loans and 
dividends must be financed with either net worth (adjusted for the 
shock 𝑧) or deposits. Constraint (10) is the capital requirement, with 
equity defined as the difference between assets (loans) and liabilities 
(deposits). Eq. (11) is the law of motion for the intensity of the firm’s 
relationship with the bank, which the bank internalizes. Aggregating 
this relationship across banks and applying stationarity yields the result 
that 𝑆 =
, and so the average relationship intensity is independent 
of policies. Eq. (12) imposes the demand curve (5), and Eq.  (13) shows 
how the bank’s net worth evolves as a function of its lending and 
financing policies. We can establish the following result: 

𝜋𝜌𝑞
1−𝜋𝜌𝑠

Proposition 2 (Optimal Lending Policies).  If 𝜓(𝑒) is twice continuously 
differentiable, banks’ optimal loan prices satisfy the Euler equation 
)𝑖 𝐿𝑡+2+𝑖
𝐿𝑡+1

[∑∞
𝑖=0

𝛱𝑡 + 𝑞𝜌𝑞

𝛱𝑡+1+𝑖

E
𝑡

]

= 𝜖−1(𝑞𝓁, 𝑞)

(14)

(𝑞𝜋(𝜌𝑞 + 𝜌𝑠)
]
E [𝜓 𝑒(𝑒𝑡+1)

𝑞
𝑞𝑡

where 𝛱𝑡 is the bank’s net rate of return in period 𝑡 per unit of loan and 
𝜖−1(𝑞𝓁, 𝑞) is the inverse price elasticity of loan demand, given respectively 
by

𝛱𝑡 =

E

𝑞
𝑞𝑡
𝑞
𝑞

𝑡

]
[𝜓 𝑒(𝑒𝑡+1)
𝑞𝓁
𝐿′

𝜖−1(𝑞𝓁, 𝑞) = 𝜙

− 𝜓 ′(𝑒𝑡) + 𝜆𝑡(1 − 𝜒)

(15)

(16)

] ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier on 
where 𝜆𝑡 = 𝜓 ′(𝑒𝑡) − 𝑞
the capital requirement and 𝜓 𝑒(𝑒𝑡+1) ≡ (1 − 𝜋)𝜓 ′(𝑛𝑡+1) + 𝜋𝜓 ′(𝑒𝑡+1) is the 
expected marginal value of internal funds.

[𝜓 𝑒(𝑒𝑡+1)

𝑞𝑑 𝜋E

𝑡

Eq. (14) has an intuitive interpretation. The left-hand side repre-
sents the sum of the bank’s discounted marginal net profits associated 
with increasing its loan price. The choice of loan price today affects 
not  only  today’s  profits  (𝛱𝑡),  but  also  profits  in  all  future  periods 
(summation term). The weight on this second term increases with the 
loading on current period lending in the law of motion for relationship 
intensity 𝜌𝑞, since this indicates a stronger dynamic pricing effect. The 
effective discount rate for future profits is 𝑞𝜋(𝜌𝑞 + 𝜌𝑠): the first two 
terms reflect the equilibrium discount factor and the probability of 
bank survival, while the latter term reflects the overall persistence of 
relationships.9 The profits in each period (15) reflect the return on 
loans, less their financing cost, plus the marginal benefit of easing the 
capital requirement.

This discounted profit stream in (14) must equal the inverse price 
elasticity of loan demand, 𝜖−1(𝑞𝓁′, 𝑞), which measures the bank’s ef-
fective market power. As shown in (16), this term is positive due to 
relationship adjustment costs (𝜙 > 0) and increases with the bank’s 
relative loan share. Consider two extreme cases. First, when the bank’s 
discount  factor  is  zero,  (14)  implies  static  monopolist  pricing:  the 
markup equals the inverse elasticity of demand. The same holds if 
𝜌𝑞 is zero, i.e. if there is no dynamic effect of today’s loan price on 
tomorrow’s demand. Second, in the competitive limit (𝜙 → 0), the 
price elasticity of loan demand becomes infinite, eliminating the term 
on the right-hand side of (14). Further, this case admits no notion of 
relationships, which eliminates the second term on the left-hand side: 
hence we recover the standard pricing condition 𝛱𝑡 = 0.

Evolution of bank distribution.  Given a current distribution of banks 
over states 𝑚(𝑥), the mass of banks next period with a particular 𝑥′
is

𝑚′(𝑥′; 𝜇) = 𝜋

{

[

∫ 𝟏

𝑛(𝑥′) = 𝑔𝓁(𝑥; 𝜇) − 𝑔𝑑 (𝑥; 𝜇), 𝑠(𝑥′)

= 𝜌𝑞

𝑔𝑞(𝑥; 𝜇)𝑔𝓁(𝑥; 𝜇)
𝐿′(𝜇)

]
+ 𝜌𝑠𝑠(𝑥)
}

× 𝛤 (𝑧(𝑥), 𝑧(𝑥′))d𝑚(𝑥; 𝜇)

× 𝛤 (𝑧(𝑥′))

+(1 − 𝜋)𝟏 [𝑛(𝑥′) = 0, 𝑠(𝑥′) = 0

]

(17)

The term in brackets in Eq.  (17) describes state transitions for incum-
bent banks. For these banks, we require that next period’s net worth 
and relationship intensity be consistent with the policies chosen this 
period, and that the evolution of the idiosyncratic shocks be consistent 
with 𝛤 . The second term captures entrant banks, who begin with no net 
worth, no lending relationships, and idiosyncratic shocks drawn from 
the ergodic distribution 𝛤 (𝑧) implied by 𝛤 (𝑧, 𝑧′)

3.3. Equilibrium definition

Definition 1.   A stationary recursive equilibrium consists of: (i) 
bank-specific and aggregate loan demand functions, 𝓁(𝑞, 𝑠; 𝜇) for all 
(𝑞, 𝑠) and 𝐿(𝜇); (ii) bank policy functions 𝑔(𝑛, 𝑠, 𝑧; 𝜇); (iii) a stationary 
joint distribution of prices and relationships 𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠); and (iv) a stationary 
joint distribution of banks over idiosyncratic states 𝑚(𝑛, 𝑠, 𝑧; 𝜇) which 
satisfy:

1. borrower optimality: bank-specific and aggregate loan demand 

satisfy (5) and (6);

8 Note that for the individual bank problem, expectations are taken with re-
spect to the idiosyncratic shock 𝑧; hence why we make explicit the expectation 
with respect to 𝜇 in the firm problem.

9 If 𝜌𝑞 + 𝜌𝑠 = 1, then there is no depreciation in relationships and this term 

gets its maximal weight.

6 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

2. bank optimality: banks’ optimal policy functions solve the bank 

problem (8)–(13);

3. stationarity  of  bank  distribution:  the  distribution  of  banks 
over idiosyncratic states is a fixed point of the operator defined 
in (17); and

4. consistency of distributions: the joint distribution of prices and 
relationships is consistent with the bank state distribution and 
banks’ optimal policies: 
𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠) = ∫ 𝟏 [𝑞 = 𝑔𝑞(𝑛, 𝑠, 𝑧; 𝜇)

] 𝑚(d𝑛, 𝑠, d𝑧; 𝜇) for all 𝑞, 𝑠

(18)

3.4. Discussion of assumptions

Implementation of lending relationships.  Two key elements of the struc-
ture  of  lending  relationships  in  our  model  bear  further  comment. 
First, we assume the representative firm maintains relationships with 
all banks, and that costs come not only from relationship formation, 
but more generally from relationship adjustment.10 This specification 
embodies two simple ideas: (i) all else equal, borrowers want to borrow 
more from banks with whom they have stronger relationships; and (ii) 
firm–bank relationships strengthen through exposure over time. Our 
specification of adjustment costs in (2) and the evolution of relation-
ships (11) are exactly consistent with these assumptions. Exposures – 
and therefore relationships – shift through time for two reasons in our 
model. First, idiosyncratic shocks render some banks financially con-
strained, which leads them to charge different prices and lend different 
amounts than other banks with the same 𝑠. Second, the exogenous exit 
of banks and replacement with new banks yields a natural ‘‘life cycle’’ 
structure. As banks optimally respond to their financial conditions, they 
may either build up or expend relationships as a form of ‘‘customer 
capital’’, as in Gourio and Rudanko (2014). Our specification captures 
both extensive (it is costly to switch lenders) and intensive (this cost 
increases  in  the  closeness  of  the  relationship)  margins.  The  former 
effect can arise, for example, from borrowers having to engage in costly 
search for lenders, which endows lenders with a type of ‘‘local market 
power’’ akin to what our model delivers. The intensive margin captures 
informational asymmetries which are alleviated through exposure and 
repeat interactions: the more a bank lends to a customer, the more 
information it acquires relative to other lenders, which can make it 
harder for the customer to switch.

Second, we assume that the firm does not internalize the formation 
of lending relationships, while banks do. The former assumption is 
made purely for tractability, as it is of course reasonable to expect 
borrowers to respond to developments in their banks’ financial condi-
tions by altering exposures to these banks. While possible in principle to 
allow for the firm to internalize relationship formation, it would require 
costly iteration between the firm and bank problems in the solution 
algorithm. By contrast, the demand system in the current framework 
allows us to solve the model with sole focus on the heterogeneous 
bank block. The fact that banks do internalize relationship formation 
shapes their optimal pricing policies, as highlighted in Proposition  2. 
As will be shown in the quantitative analysis below, this has important 
implications for how banks respond to financial shocks both at the 
individual level and in the aggregate.

Specification of relationship adjustment costs.  We assume quadratic ad-
justment costs in loan shares in our baseline model. This specification 
is attractive for two primary reasons. First, it delivers a simple closed 
form for bank-specific loan demand (5). Not only does this facilitate 
computation (see Appendix C), but – more importantly – it also yields 
a simple structural equation which we can map to the data in order to 

10 Of course, relationship formation is also costly in our model; the specifica-
tion of adjustment costs in (2) implies that the firm incurs costs for borrowing 
any positive amount from a bank with no relationships (𝑠 = 0).

7 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

obtain an empirical estimate of the critical relationship parameters 𝜙
and 𝜌𝑞 (see Section 4.2.2). Second, it delivers a single sufficient statistic 
– the effective interest rate  ̃𝑅(𝜇) from Eq.  (7) – which summarizes the 
key economic forces driving aggregate outcomes in the model. As we 
show in Appendix B.3, though, the same central economic forces still 
hold under a more general specification of adjustment costs.

Macroeconomic models of customer capital typically feature con-
stant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences that feature the level of 
relationships or customer capital as a preference shifter within the CES 
aggregator, e.g. Gilchrist et al. (2017). While feasible, this specification 
raises some issues in our framework. First, what is being aggregated 
are dollars rather than utility over consumption of goods and services. 
Second,  the  CES  with  customer  capital  as  a  preference  shifter  still 
features a constant price-elasticity of demand, which does not vary with 
the intensity of the relationships. We derive the demand system under 
CES preferences in Appendix B.4.

One way to address the second concern is to aggregate loans across 
banks using the more general (Kimball, 1995) aggregator, which al-
lows for a price-elasticity of demand that varies both with price and 
relationship intensity. This approach is still subject to the conceptual 
issue of aggregation of dollar loan values. Additionally, as we show 
in Appendix B.5, the main drawback of this specification is that the 
resulting bank-specific demand is no longer linear or log-linear and 
therefore not amenable to direct estimation, which is one of the main 
advantages of our framework.

Credit  risk.  In  our  model,  all  loans  are  risk-less.  We  abstract  from 
borrower credit risk for two main reasons. First, most firms in the 
sample that we use to calibrate the model have very low default risk 
(the median 1-year probability of default in our sample is of 0.73%). 
Second, default risk would complicate the model substantially by mak-
ing it harder to aggregate outcomes for the borrower across banks. This 
assumption is not innocuous, as default risk could significantly affect 
banks’ pricing decisions, interacting with their own state-dependent 
discount factors that arise from equity issuance costs. In particular, it 
has been shown that ongoing relationships between banks and firms 
may distort pricing incentives and generate instances of overlending or 
insurance provision by the bank to the firm (see, for example, Faria-
e-Castro et al., 2024). To account for the fact that the model does 
not feature credit risk, all of our estimation exercises either include 
explicit controls for default risk, or factors that subsume this risk (such 
as firm-time fixed effects).

Customer  capital  in  bank  liabilities.  Our  model  also  abstracts  from 
broader definitions of bank relationships, particularly its accumulation 
on the liability side of the balance sheet through deposit relationships. 
For example, Drechsler et al. (2017) argue that imperfect competition 
in deposit markets is a key factor that modulates the transmission of 
monetary policy. Polo (2021) expands on this idea and develops a 
quantitative macroeconomic model where banks accumulate customer 
capital in deposit markets, showing that this amplifies monetary policy 
shocks. An interesting extension of our model would feature customer 
capital  accumulation  on  both  sides  of  the  balance  sheet,  and  how 
the  two  relate  to  each  other  (i.e.,  whether  they  are  substitutes  or 
complements).

4. Mapping the model to the data

We parameterize our model in three steps. First, we assign values 
externally (i.e. outside the solution of the model) to standard parame-
ters in the macroeconomics and banking literature. Second, we directly 
estimate two of our model’s unique relationship lending parameters – 
the adjustment cost 𝜙 and the persistence 𝜌𝑞 parameters – from the 
micro-data using a semi-structural approach. Third, we jointly estimate 
the remaining parameters so that the model’s stationary equilibrium 
matches a series of relevant banking industry moments. We describe 
each of these steps in turn. The full parameterization of the model is 
summarized in Table  2.

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

4.1. Externally set parameters

We set nine parameters externally. The risk-free quarterly discount 
price 𝑞 implies an annualized risk-free rate of 𝑟ann = 2%, in line with 
recent macroeconomic data. We set the interest rate on deposits 𝑞𝑑 to be 
consistent with this risk-free rate and an annualized liquidity premium 
of 17 bps (van Binsbergen et al., 2022). The capital requirement is 
𝜒 = 8%, in line with current capital requirements for large bank holding 
companies in the US. Since all exit is exogenous in the model, we set 
the bank exit rate equal to the historical average quarterly bank exit 
frequency, 1 − 𝜋 = 0.72%. We set total returns to scale for the firm to 
be consistent with a profit share of 5%, a capital share of 0.4, and a 
labor share of 0.6. The user cost of capital is set to be consistent with 
an annual interest rate of 2% and depreciation rate of 7%. Finally, we 
normalize the wage rate 𝑤 to imply a marginal factor cost of one and 
the steady state level of aggregate TFP 𝐴 = 1.

4.2. Directly estimated parameters

Our model features three parameters that are not standard in models 
of banking and financial frictions: the cost of adjusting relationships, 
𝜙, and the parameters governing the persistence of relationships at 
the bank-level, 𝜌𝑞 and 𝜌𝑠. We directly estimate the first two on micro 
data exploiting the relevant model demand equations, and internally 
calibrate 𝜌𝑠 in the next step. In particular, we use loan-level data from 
the Federal Reserve’s FR Y-14Q data to estimate the equation for bank-
specific loan demand in (5) with an instrumental variables approach 
and obtain estimates for 𝜙 and 𝜌𝑞. We now describe the data and the 
estimation procedure in detail.

4.2.1. Data and sample selection

We use the Y-14 loan-level dataset described in Section 2 to con-
struct a ‘‘relationship panel’’ at the firm-BHC-quarter level, where the 
quantity of credit 𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 is the total value of loans outstanding of firm 
𝑓 owed to BHC 𝑏 at quarter 𝑡, and the interest rate 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 is the average 
rate on those loans, weighted by utilized loan value.11 After all sample 
restrictions, our final panel runs from 2013Q1 to 2022Q2 and includes 
3.365 million observations, for 242,623 distinct firms and 41 distinct 
BHCs.

4.2.2. Estimating parameters using bank-level loan demand

To estimate 𝜙 and 𝜌𝑞, we exploit the fact that these parameters 
appear in both the bank-specific demand curve (5) and the law of 
motion for relationship intensity (11). Given data on loan quantities 
and interest rates, as well as controls for unobservable bank and firm 
characteristics that could influence these relations, we can substitute 
for 𝑠𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 in (11) using (5) to estimate these two parameters using linear 
regression in a single step: 
𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡
𝐿𝑓 ,𝑡

(𝑟𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡) + 𝜌𝑞

𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡−1
𝐿𝑓 ,𝑡−1

= 1 − 𝑆𝑓 ,𝑡 −

+ 𝜌𝑠𝑠𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡−1

(19)

̄𝑞
𝜙

≡ ∑

𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡
𝐿𝑓 ,𝑡

𝑏 𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 is total borrowing by a particular firm across all 
where 𝐿𝑓 ,𝑡
≡ ∑
banks, and 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡
𝑟𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 is the balance-weighted average interest 
𝑏
rate paid by a particular firm across all banks. The goal is to regress the 
loan share of each bank within a given firm on: (i) the spread between 
the interest rate charged by the bank to that firm and the average rate 
paid by the firm, which should identify 𝜙; and (ii) the lagged loan share 
of each bank within the firm, which should identify 𝜌𝑞.

11 We also impose some additional restrictions that are aimed at eliminating 
observations that are likely errors: we drop all loans with interest rates less 
or equal than zero or above 50%, as well as loans for which the size of 
the commitment is non-positive, or the utilized amount is larger than the 
commitment.

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

There are three main challenges to directly estimating (19): (i) un-
observed heterogeneity, (ii) the presence of terms such as 𝑆𝑓 ,𝑡, 𝑠𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡−1, 
which are not directly measurable in the data, and (iii) endogeneity. 
We now explain how we address each of these problems in order.

First, there could be unobserved heterogeneity among lenders and 
borrowers that could affect the demand of a firm for credit from a 
particular bank.  To address this, we include firm-time fixed effects 
𝛼𝑓 ,𝑡, which help control for fluctuations in overall credit demand by 
the firm that are unrelated to the characteristics of its relationship 
with different banks. We also include bank fixed effects 𝛼𝑏 to control 
for time-invariant bank-level characteristics such as different business 
models or degrees or risk tolerance. Additionally, we include several 
time-varying bank-level controls 𝑋𝑏,𝑡 that help control for changes in 
bank characteristics over time.12

Second,  Eq.  (19)  contains  extra  terms  that  are  not  directly  ob-
servable  in  the  data:  𝑆𝑓 ,𝑡  and  𝑠𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡−1.  𝑆𝑓 ,𝑡  is  a  time-varying  firm 
characteristic and should therefore be subsumed by the firm-time fixed 
effects. There is no simple way, however, to account for 𝑠𝑏,𝑓 ,𝑡−1. We 
control for this variable by postulating that there should be a positive 
association between relationship intensity and the length of the rela-
tionship between a bank and a firm, which is observable in our dataset 
and that we include as a control as 𝜏𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡.13

Third, Eq. (19) is a demand curve, and thus OLS estimates suffer 
from classical simultaneity bias. We address this issue by constructing 
an instrument for bank-specific credit supply shocks following Amiti 
and  Weinstein  (2018).  Specifically,  we  first  estimate  the  following 
regression 

𝑟𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡 = 𝛾𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑏,𝑡 + 𝑣𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡

(20)

where 𝛾𝑓 ,𝑡 and 𝛾𝑏,𝑡 are firm-time and bank-time fixed effects. The idea 
is that the firm-time fixed effect controls for any factor that is related 
to the demand for credit, while the bank-time fixed effect absorbs all 
variation that is related to the supply of credit, and is by construction 
orthogonal to demand. We therefore use ̂𝛾𝑏,𝑡 as a valid instrument for 
the credit spread 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡. The final form of Eq.  (19) that we estimate 
is: 
𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡
𝐿𝑓 ,𝑡

+ 𝛼𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝛼𝑏 + 𝛾𝑋𝑏,𝑡 + 𝜁𝜏𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 (21)

= 𝛽(𝑟𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡) + 𝜌𝑞

𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡−1
𝐿𝑓 ,𝑡−1

Estimation results are reported in Table  1. The relatively low num-
ber of observations (compared to the size of the full sample) is due 
to two factors: first, our identification strategy relies on multi-bank 
firms, that is, firms that borrow from multiple banks, while the vast 
majority of firms in our data borrow from one bank only. We elaborate 
on and address this issue below. Second, we estimate (21) only on loans 
originated in the last 4 quarters. The model features one-period debt, 
and so the firm can effectively adjust its demand for debt across banks 
every period. In reality, firms borrow at many different maturities, and 
it is not clear that a firm will find it advantageous or even feasible 
to constantly prepay debt that was contracted in the past. Older loans 
are likely to be priced at rates that no longer reflect aggregate credit 
market conditions, and so including them could bias our estimates in 
the direction of estimating a lower credit demand elasticity.

The first column reports the simple OLS results, while column (2) 
reports the estimation results using the credit supply shock instrument. 
Both specifications include the full set of fixed effects. In the instru-
mental variables specification the point estimate  ̂𝛽 = −19.391 implies 

12 We include bank size, measured as the log of total assets, bank leverage 
(liabilities over assets), a measure of asset liquidity (liquid assets over assets), 
the loan ratio (total loans to assets) and the deposit ratio (total deposits to 
liabilities). All these variables are measured from the FR Y-9C.
13 We have experimented with different measures of relationship length: 
‘‘continuous relationship length’’, which resets with each observable break, or 
‘‘maximum relationship length’’, which counts the time since the earliest start 
of a relationship in the sample. Both approaches yield similar results.

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Table 1
Estimating 𝜙 and 𝜌𝑞 using firm- and cell-level data.
(2)

(4)

(3)

(2.664)

  Spread, 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡

(1)
−12.898*** −19.391*** −7.850*** −9.906** 
(3.991)  
(1.574)
0.528***  
  Lagged loan share, 𝓁𝑓 ,𝑏,𝑡−1∕𝐿𝑓 ,𝑡−1 0.622***
(0.010)  
(0.008)
ISL cell  
229,764  
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

  Firm identifier
  Observations
  Firm-Quarter FE
  Bank FE
  Bank & Relationship controls
  Model
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the BHC level.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.

(0.785) 
0.563***
(0.009)
ISL cell
259,972
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

TIN
60,332
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

TIN
74,121
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

0.568***
(0.009)

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

̂𝜙 = 0.051. The implied ̂𝜌𝑞 can be read directly from the second line and 
is estimated to be equal to 0.568.

One  issue  with  our  estimation  method  that  also  applies  more
broadly to the identification approach of Amiti and Weinstein (2018) 
is that it relies on firms that borrow from multiple banks in order 
to isolate demand from supply effects. It is well documented across 
space and time that the vast majority of firms borrow from a single 
lender; in our sample over 80% of firms maintain a relationship with 
a single lender. This means that our reliance on multi-lender firms for 
identification precludes the use of the majority of our data. Degryse 
et al. (2019) address this issue by defining borrowers at the industry-
size-location  level,  instead  of  at  the  firm  level.  The  identification 
assumption is that the demand for credit should be relatively stable 
among firms of the same industry (I), size (S), and location (L). We 
apply their methodology and define ‘‘ISL cells’’ where industry is the 
3-digit NAICS, location is the CBSA of the borrower’s address, and size 
is the borrower’s decile in terms of total assets. This generates a total 
of 82,685 unique cells in our sample.

The results for this alternative estimation procedure are reported in 
columns (3) and (4) of Table  1. This sample – now almost four times 
larger – yields a smaller coefficient (in absolute value): the IV estimate 
for the slope parameter is  ̂𝛽 = −9.906, which yields a larger estimate 
for the elasticity,  ̂𝜙 = 0.100. The estimated  ̂𝜌𝑞 = 0.528 is very similar. 
To balance the comparative advantages of these approaches, in our 
quantitative model we use the average of the estimates for the TIN and 
ISL versions of the IV regressions in columns (2) and (4).

4.3. Jointly estimated

4.3.1. Parameters and targets

The remaining parameters are jointly estimated so that the model 
matches a series of targets from the data, given the externally set and 
directly estimated parameters. These parameters and target moments 
are summarized in Table  2.C. The working capital parameter 𝜅 deter-
mines the level of overall loan demand given output. Therefore, this 
parameter is informed by the level of business debt relative to total 
output, which averages 71.5% for the U.S. economy. This parameter 
also determines the intensity of loan demand, which shapes how much 
market power banks have.

1−𝜋(𝜌𝑠+𝜌𝑞 )
1−𝜋𝜌𝑠

Given 𝜋 and 𝜌𝑞, the relationship persistence parameter 𝜌𝑠 deter-
mines the ‘‘baseline’’ loan demand 1−𝑆 =
 banks face (i.e. the 
intercept of the demand curve at a net interest rate of 0 for a bank with 
no relationships). Intuitively, the lower is 𝜌𝑠, the higher is 1 − 𝑆, which 
means that banks face a higher baseline level of loan demand at a given 
price: that is, they have greater effective market power. Therefore, to 
discipline this parameter, we target banks’ average net interest margin. 
Because our model has no default, and risk premia are an important 
component of loan spreads and therefore of net interest margins, we 
target a ‘‘no-default’’ net interest margin which filters out default risk 

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

premia from loan spreads. To construct this measure, we use Y-14 data 
to regress interest rates on new loans (originated in the last 4 quarters) 
on the originating bank’s reported estimate for the 1-year probability 
of default. We then sum the constant and the residual, and call this 
the ‘‘zero-default interest rate’’. We compute the average zero-default 
interest rate for each bank in our sample, weighted by loan size, and 
subtract the average interest expense on deposits computed from the 
Call Reports. This measure averages 1.8% in our sample period, and 
our estimated 𝜌𝑠 is consistent with 1 − 𝑆 = 0.056.

We  assume  that  the  shocks  to  bank  net  worth  follow  an  AR(1) 
process with mean 𝑧 = 0, persistence 𝜌𝑧, and standard deviation of 
innovations 𝜎𝑧.14 We model convex costs of issuing equity by using 
a piece-wise linear cost function in which 𝜓 ′(𝑒) = 1 for 𝑒 ≥ 0 and 
𝜓 ′(𝑒) = 1 + 𝜓 > 1 for 𝑒 < 0. This specification is commonly used in 
the dynamic corporate finance literature (Hennessy and Whited, 2005). 
Further, it allows us to prove that banks’ optimal financing policies 
have the property that if the capital requirement is slack, then the bank 
does not issue equity, which is a useful result computationally.

The  parameters  𝜌𝑧,  𝜎𝑧,  and  𝜓,  then,  are  closely  related  to  the 
financing choices banks make, and so we discipline them with moments 
of the data describing these choices. Given the costs of issuing equity 
and the relative cheapness of deposits, banks generally prefer to finance 
using deposits, and so our model closely matches the high average 
leverage of 87.7% we observe in the banking sector. It is worth noting, 
however, that the capital requirement is not always binding in our 
model, and so we obtain a distribution of capital buffers as in the data 
(Corbae and D’Erasmo, 2021). Beyond deposits, banks can respond to 
financial shocks by retaining earnings, cutting dividends, or issuing new 
equity. We ensure realistic behavior along this dimension by targeting 
the average gross equity issuance and net dividend payout rates of 1.1% 
and 5.8% (Baron, 2020).

4.3.2. Solving the model

Internally calibrating the five parameters above requires iteratively 
solving  the  model  over  the  parameter  space.  Since  computing  our 
model requires several non-standard steps, we describe our algorithm 
at a high level before proceeding. Appendix C contains the detailed 
algorithm.

The main complication in solving for a stationary equilibrium is 
that equilibrium is described not by a small vector of aggregate prices, 
but by the entire joint distribution of prices and relationships. How-
ever,  given  guesses  of  the  distribution  of  banks  over  idiosyncratic 
states, 𝑚(𝑥), and bank pricing policy functions, 𝑔𝑞(𝑥), we can use the 
consistency condition (18) to infer the implied joint distribution of 
prices and relationships 𝜇(𝑞, 𝑠). Given this distribution, we can compute 
the demand-relevant summary statistics 𝑅(𝜇) and  ̃𝑅(𝜇), which are the 
necessary inputs to bank-specific and aggregate loan demand according 
to Eqs. (5) and (6). Finally, we can use these implied demand curves 
to solve for updates of banks’ optimal policies, which in turn deliver 
an implied update to the initial guess of the distribution of banks. This 
procedure can be repeated until convergence on both policy functions 
and the distribution in order to obtain a stationary equilibrium.

5. Model mechanics and the role of relationships

In this section, we use the steady state of our baseline economy and 
several variants to explain the key mechanisms in our model of relation-
ship lending. This provides the underpinnings for understanding how 
relationship lending alters aggregate dynamics, which is the focus of 
the next section.

14 That is, we assume 𝑧′ = 𝜌𝑧𝑧 + (1 − 𝜌𝑧)𝑧 + 𝜀𝑧, where 𝜀𝑧 ∼  (0, 𝜎𝑧). This 
shock process is discretized over a grid of size 𝑁𝑧 = 11 using the Adda-Cooper 
method.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Table 2
Summary of calibration.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Description

Value

Target

Data

Model

4

4

2%

0.17%
8%
0.9928
0.38
0.57
9%
3.78
1

Annualized risk-free rate
Deposit liquidity premium
Capital requirement
Bank survival rate
Capital share
Labor share
Ann. user cost of capital
Wage rate
Aggregate TFP

Quarterly discount price 𝑞 = (1 + 𝑟ann)− 1
Quarterly deposit price 𝑞𝑑 = (1 + 𝑟ann − 𝜈ann)− 1
Current US bank regulation
Quarterly bank exit rate of 0.72%
Profit share of 5%, capital share of 0.4
Profit share of 5%, labor share of 0.6
2% interest plus 7% depreciation rate
Normalize factor costs to 1
Normalization

  Panel A: Externally assigned parameters
  𝑟ann
  𝜈ann
  𝜒
  𝜋
  𝛼
  𝜂
  𝑢𝑐
  𝑤
  𝐴
  Panel B: Directly Estimated Parameters
  𝜙
  𝜌𝑞
  Panel C: Internally Calibrated Parameters
  𝜅
  𝜌𝑠
  𝜓
  𝜌𝑧
  𝜎𝑧
Notes: Firm leverage and business debt to GDP are sourced from the Flow of Funds. The leverage moment corresponds to corporate firms. Gross equity issuance and net dividend 
payout rates are computed following Baron (2020). The net interest margin is computed using Y-14Q interest rate on new loans (originated in the last four quarters), residualized 
from firm 1-year probability default, and deposit expense data from the Call Reports. All moments are averaged between 2009Q1 and 2020Q3.

Working capital constraint
Persistence of relationships
Marginal equity issuance cost
Persistence of net worth shocks
Std. dev. of net worth shocks

Business debt to GDP ratio
Average net interest margin
Gross equity issuance/NW
Net dividend payouts/NW
Average bank leverage

Average of estimates, Section 4.2.2
’’

Lending share adj. costs
Mkt. share impact on rels.

71.5%
1.8%
1.1%
5.8%
87.7%

71.5%
1.8%
1.9%
1.1%
87.4%

0.755
0.427
0.750
0.450
0.006

0.068
0.548

Throughout our quantitative analysis, we focus on two main ver-
sions of the model: (i) the baseline, whose calibration was described 
in the previous section; and (ii) a competitive version of the model 
where banks take market interest rates as given and choose how much 
to lend. Details of this second economy are presented in Appendix B.6. 
In this model, the lack of adjustment costs in the borrower’s problem 
removes any meaningful notion of relationships. This implies a single 
equilibrium lending rate is taken as given by all banks. Banks then 
choose 𝓁′ directly, and a bank’s state is fully described by (𝑛, 𝑧). The 
competitive version of the model features banks with no market power 
since they face an infinite price elasticity of loan demand at each date.
We also report results for three other variants: (iii) a low elasticity
version,  where adjustment costs 𝜙 are higher than in the baseline, 
giving banks have more effective market power; (iv) a low punishment
version in which 𝜌𝑞 → 0 so that banks face the same static loan demand 
elasticity but do not sever relationships as easily as in the baseline 
model; and (v) a fixed relationship version in which the distribu-
tion of 𝑠 is taken from the baseline economy, but we assume that 
𝑠 is a permanent type, removing the dynamic incentives to maintain 
relationships.15

5.1. How do lending relationships shape industry-level and aggregate out-
comes?

5.1.1. Loan rates decrease as competition increases

Table  3.A presents statistics on interest rates and loan quantities, 
confirming basic insights about competition in our model environment. 
The effective interest rate  ̃𝑅 varies sharply with the degree of competi-
tion, dropping 45.5% in the competitive model relative to the baseline. 
This lower effective interest rate raises loan volumes by 5.9%. Raising 
banks’ static market power in the low elasticity economy increases the 
effective interest rate by 29.0%. When banks’ static market power re-
mains unchanged but becomes less sensitive to pricing decisions in the 

15 The low elasticity model has 𝜙 60% above the baseline. The low pun-
ishment model has  ̂𝜌𝑞 80% lower than the baseline. When 𝜌𝑞 is changed 
to  ̂𝜌𝑞,  𝜌𝑠  is  also  changed  to  ̂𝜌𝑠  so  that  𝑆  has  the  same  value  as  in  the 
baseline; that is,  ̂𝜌𝑠 =
, and reducing 𝜌𝑞 implies increasing 𝜌𝑠. In the 
fixed relationship model, we recalibrate 𝜙 to match the average net interest 
margin in the baseline model. This is necessary because the removal of the 
dynamic incentives effectively increases banks’ market power, and so 𝜙 must 
be reduced for comparability. See Appendix B.7 for details.

𝑆−𝜋 ̂𝜌𝑞
𝜋𝑆

low punishment economy, effective interest rates increase by 20.3%. 
Finally, we recalibrate 𝜙 in the fixed relationship economy such that the 
equilibrium effective interest rate equals that from the baseline model: 
this facilitates apples-to-apples comparisons of aggregate dynamics in 
Section 6 below.

The next three rows decompose these differences using the three 
components  of  ̃𝑅  from  (7).  The  bulk  of  the  difference  stems  from 
higher average rates: banks exercise their market power. The positive 
covariance between relationships and rates behaves similarly, but with 
a  smaller  magnitude:  banks  with  stronger  relationships  can  charge 
higher rates and have the same loan volume (naturally, this effect is 
absent in the perfectly competitive economy, which has no notion of 
relationships). The covariance term is notably large (68 bps, or 15.5% 
of the total effective interest rate) for the low punishment model: in 
this case, not only are banks with stronger relationships inclined to 
charge higher rates, but the greater persistence in relationships induces 
a more unequal bank distribution. Finally, there is a small attenuation 
effect arising from interest rate dispersion: greater variance in loan 
rates  provides  more  scope  for  borrowers  to  substitute  into  cheaper 
borrowing. This effect, however, is quantitatively small across model 
specifications.

5.1.2. Relationships compress the distribution of bank net worth

Table  3.B focuses on moments related to the distribution of financial 
capital (net worth) and relationships in the banking industry. Net worth 
is slightly lower on average and less dispersed in the baseline economy 
than in the competitive economy. Fig.  3 plots the partial distributions 
of net worth and relationships, and the joint distribution of net worth 
and  relationships  in  the  baseline  model  (the  latter  two  objects  are 
not defined for the competitive economy). The compression of the net 
worth distribution in Fig.  3(a) combines two main forces. First, bank 
market power generates higher franchise values and lower optimal loan 
issuance in the baseline model. Banks ration quantities to keep markups 
high, as is standard in models of imperfect competition. Thus banks 
tend to cluster at lower levels of net worth than unconstrained banks 
in the competitive case, where there is a large concentration of banks 
to the right of the dense part of the distribution in the baseline model. 
Counteracting this first effect, though, is the fact that profitability is 
lower – and therefore financial constraints are effectively tighter – in 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Table 3
Cross-sectional and aggregate results across model variants.

Baseline
(i)

comp.
(ii)

Low elas.
(iii)

Low pun.
(iv)

Fixed rel. 
(v)

1.99
1.99
–
–
0.72
1.99

4.39
3.75
0.68
−0.05
0.66
4.36

3.65
3.55
0.10
−0.01
0.68
3.64

4.71
4.54
0.18
−0.02
0.65
4.70

̃𝑅(𝜇)
𝑅(𝜇)
C
𝜇(𝑟, 𝑠)
V
𝜇(𝑟)
𝐿′(𝜇)

  Panel A: pricing and lending
  Effective interest rate (pp, ann.)
  = average interest rate
  + covariance term
  + variance term
  Loan volume
  Loan-weighted average interest rate
  Panel B: banking industry moments
  Average net worth
  Coefficient of variation, net worth
  Coefficient of variation, relationships
  Correlation, net worth and relationships
  Correlation, net worth and spread
  Correlation, relationships and spread
  Panel C: surplus metrics (pp change relative to baseline)
  Bank value
–
  Firm value
–
  Total value
–
Notes: In Panel A, all pricing moments are expressed in annualized net percentage points. In Panel B, all net worth objects are computed using 
total beginning-of-period net worth, 𝑛 + 𝑧. In Panel C, we report the percentage point difference in the indicated welfare metric relative to the 
baseline model.

0.104
0.29
0.24
−0.05
−0.59
0.66

3.66
3.64
0.04
−0.02
0.67
3.63

0.079
0.28
0.22
0.89
0.46
0.70

0.090
0.33
0.24
0.89
0.35
0.59

0.078
0.41
0.48
0.76
0.48
0.90

0.094
0.79
–
–
–
–

−71.4
5.8
2.8

−5.2
0.0
−0.2

36.7
−3.6
−2.0

57.8
−2.6
−0.2

Fig. 3.  Distributions of the endogenous state variables across models. Notes: Panels (a) and (b) plot the partial distributions for total beginning-of-period net worth (𝑛 + 𝑧) and 
relationships (𝑠), respectively. Average net worth for each model is presented in Table  3. The average relationship intensity, represented by the black line in panel (b), is common 
across all our relationship models by construction. Panel (c) plots the average relationship intensity with a one standard deviation band conditional on each level of net worth in 
the baseline model.

the competitive economy.16 Correspondingly, there are far more banks 
with very low net worth in the competitive economy.

The  low  elasticity  economy  features  lower  average,  more  com-
pressed net worth than the baseline. This stems from the fact that more 
profitable lending means banks are better able to smooth dividends in 
the face of idiosyncratic uncertainty. Increasing dynamic market power 
instead, as in the low punishment economy, also yields lower average 
net worth but with more dispersion. On the one hand, more persistent 
relationships give banks an incentive to accumulate more net worth to 
lend large quantities at high spreads. On the other, the dominance of 
banks with strong relationships in this model makes it hard for smaller 
banks to compete and grow, and so there is a long left tail of smaller 
banks in this case. Quantitatively, the second effect dominates.

5.1.3. Financial and relationship capital are complements

The last rows in Table  3.B present correlations between the key state 
variables and interest rate spreads. In the simple relationship models 
(baseline, low elasticity, and low punishment), there is a strong positive 
correlation between net worth and relationships. Fig.  3(c) depicts the 

16 Additionally, since each unit of lending is less profitable, the ‘‘life cycle’’ 
of net worth tends to have a much flatter profile in the more competitive 
economies (shown in Panel (c) of Fig.  6(c) and discussed below).

range of relationships across the distribution of net worth in the base-
line economy, which visually confirms this correlation: banks with less 
financial capital have weaker relationships. While relationship strength 
increases across the entire net worth distribution, this rise is especially 
sharp over the bottom quartile of the distribution. Notably, this effect 
is absent in the fixed relationship model, since banks ‘‘endowed’’ with 
strong relationships need no financial capital buffers to preserve them.
In our baseline model, the correlations of spreads with both net 
worth and relationships are positive. This result combines two effects. 
First,  less  capitalized  banks  –  who  are  constrained  by  the  capital 
requirement and the prospect of having to issue equity – charge high 
spreads and lend small amounts, as shown in Fig.  4(b). Second, banks 
with  weak  relationships  tend  to  price  competitively  –  even  below 
market, with 𝑟 − 𝑅 < 0 – to build relationships for the future, as shown 
in  Fig.   4(c).  With  stronger  relationships,  banks  can  sustain  lending 
above market interest rates. In isolation, these two forces would lead 
the correlation between spreads and net worth (relationships) to be 
negative (positive). These forces are tempered, however, by the strong 
positive  correlation  between  net  worth  and  relationships  described 
above. That is, the banks who are financially constrained and would 
like to charge high spreads tend to be the very same banks who have 
weak relationships and therefore would like to charge low spreads. 
These two effects roughly offset each other for all but the smallest 
banks (for whom the second effect dominates), as highlighted in Fig. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Fig. 4.  Steady state loan pricing policies. Notes: Panel (a) plots the first and second moments of the pricing policies (expressed as annualized percentage point spreads over the 
average interest rate) conditional on a given level of net worth over the distribution of banks in the baseline model. Variation in pricing at each level of 𝑛 comes from dispersion 
in 𝑠 and 𝑧. Panels (b) and (c) plot sample pricing policy functions over the distribution of net worth and relationships: spreads are zero by definition in the competitive case. 
Panels (b) and (c) each fix 𝑧 = 0, the median level, and 𝑠 or 𝑛 at the 25th percentile from.

towards the top left in Fig.  5, where banks are financially constrained 
but have a valuable loan franchise due to strong relationships: here, 
banks  are  in  fact  quite  willing  to  issue  equity.  Moving  down  and 
to the right in the figure towards more financial capital and weaker 
relationships, banks are less likely to find it optimal to issue new equity, 
and so the marginal valuation of net worth moves towards 1.

5.1.4. Relationships redistribute surplus from borrowers to lenders

A natural question for comparing our model economies is: how does 
the nature of lending relationships affect the allocation of economic sur-
plus between banks and firms? Table  3.C addresses these questions by 
comparing bank, firm, and total value for each model variant relative to 
the baseline economy. While our model is not well-suited to traditional 
welfare analysis, we can measure both bank and firm values directly 
using value functions since both objective functions are denominated 
in dollars. Total bank value is measured as 𝑉 ≡ ∫ 𝑉 (𝑥)d𝑚(𝑥), total firm 
value is the solution to the firm problem, denoted 𝑊 , and total value 
is simply the sum 𝑉 + 𝑊 .17

Making  the  banking  sector  more  competitive  reallocates  surplus 
from banks to firms: total bank value drops by more than 70% in 
the  competitive  economy  relative  to  the  baseline,  while  firm  value 
increases nearly 6%. Similarly, making the banking sector less competi-
tive – either statically or dynamically – works in the opposite direction. 
Interpreting the changes in the fixed relationship model is less intuitive: 
while banks face no dynamic discipline on their pricing decisions, the 
demand  elasticity  is  much  higher  to  facilitate  comparison  with  the 
baseline model. While these effects cancel in the aggregate, they do 
involve a slight loss of surplus for banks and a slight gain for firms.

5.1.5. Relationships shape banks’ life cycles

Fig.  6 investigates the life cycle of a bank beginning from entry 
across all versions of our model. In all cases, new banks start out with 
no net worth (panel (c)), which does not allow for much lending (panel 
(a)). In the less competitive economies, banks optimally price below 
market (panel (b)) in order to build relationships (panel (d)). Given the 
persistence of relationships in the low punishment case, the required 
period of pricing below market is much longer. By contrast, in the 
competitive model, banks simply price at the market rate and increase 
loan volume gradually alongside net worth. In the fixed relationship 
model, a bank’s only goal is to reach the desired level of net worth: 
in the short run, they do this by building up loan volumes. Notably, 
the results in Fig.  6 suggest that there is a ‘‘sweet spot’’ with regard to 

17 Note that by computing total value as the sum of bank and firm value, we 
are implicitly weighting the two sectors by their profit shares in the economy. 
Since firm profits are large relative to bank profits, then, the total value metrics 
closely follow the firm value metrics.

Fig. 5.  Complementarity of financial and relationship capital. Notes: This figure plots 
a numerical approximation to the slope of the bank value function with respect to net 
worth with 𝑧 fixed at the median level in the baseline model. The color at each point 
represents the marginal value of net worth at that point, with shading governed by the 
color bar to the right of the figure.

4(a), which plots the joint distribution of net worth and spreads in the 
baseline model.

How do changes in the competitive landscape alter these effects? 
With more market power (static or dynamic), constrained banks are 
able to charge higher interest rates while sustaining similar levels of 
lending. This naturally strengthens the correlations between spreads 
and relationships, as well as between spreads and net worth. Here 
again, though, the fixed relationship model is quite different: since 
relationships  are  stable,  the  banks  with  the  strongest  relationships 
charge  the  highest  spreads  and  have  the  weakest  capital  buffering 
incentives, and so the correlation between spreads and net worth is 
sharply negative.

Our model, then, sheds new light on financial constraints in bank-
ing. Measuring banks’ net worth provides information on banks’ pricing 
and lending decisions, but the degree to which these policy functions 
are actually elastic with respect to net worth, and the levels of net 
worth at which this elasticity manifests, can vary considerably with 
relationships and the competitive landscape.

Ultimately, we find that financial and relationship capital are com-
plements. These two types of capital are complements if more net worth 
delivers more value to a bank with stronger relationships, i.e. if the 
cross-partial of the value function,  𝜕2𝑉
𝜕𝑛𝜕𝑠  is positive. Fig.  5 plots the 
partial of the value function with respect to net worth over a range 
of bank states to confirm this point: everywhere in the state space, this 
object is weakly increasing as relationships strengthen. Quantitatively, 
the marginal valuation of net worth is bounded between 1 and 1 + 𝜓
given our specification of equity issuance costs. The value 1 + 𝜓 obtains 

12 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Fig. 6.  Average bank life cycle across model variants. Notes: For each version of the model, we simulate paths of 𝑇 = 40 periods for 𝑁 = 10,000 entrant banks with initial states 
𝑛 = 0, 𝑠 = 0, and 𝑧 drawn from the ergodic distribution 𝛤 (𝑧). Each plot presents averages of the indicated metrics across the 𝑁 banks for each date 𝑡 = 1, … , 𝑇 .

the accumulation of net worth: in the competitive economy, low profit 
margins across all banks make it hard for banks to accumulate financial 
capital, while in the less competitive low punishment economy the 
intensity  with  which  small,  weak  relationship  banks  must  compete 
against more established banks renders profits similarly low. As banks 
accumulate financial and relationship capital, they lend more while 
increasing spreads.

5.2. Empirical validation

This section validates our model along two dimensions. First, we 
demonstrate that our model matches how spreads evolve over a lending 
relationship  in  the  data  by  appropriately  balancing  two  competing 
forces. Second, we document that our baseline model generates incen-
tives to build up capital buffers that are more in line with the data than 
the alternatives we consider.

5.2.1. Evolution of spreads over a relationship

A  key  novelty  in  our  framework  is  the  link  between  persistent 
lending relationships and banks’ pricing decisions. To have confidence 
in our model’s predictions about how relationships affect aggregates, 
then, we must first provide evidence that our model delivers pricing 
implications given changes in relationships that are in line with the 
data.

Recall that Fig.  2 shows the average difference in interest rates for 
loans from new banks (‘‘switches’’) compared to loans from banks with 
existing relationships. The key insights from this figure are that: (i) 
switching loans have are relatively cheap immediately upon and in 
the first year following the switch; and (ii) this pattern reverses in the 
second year after the switch.

Does our model deliver similar patterns? We address this question 
by simulating a panel of banks drawn randomly from the stationary 
distribution  and  study  how  they  behave  after  a  share  𝛿𝑠  of  their 
relationship capital 𝑠 is destroyed. Holding the rest of the banks’ states 

fixed, this reduction in relationship capital accounts for differences in 
lending practices solely attributable to differences in relationships, as 
in our empirical analysis. We choose 𝛿𝑠 for each model variant to match 
the average initial drop in spreads immediately upon switching of 5.4 
bps.18

Fig.  7 plots the difference between switching and non-switching 
loan spreads for our baseline model and the two variants (low elasticity 
and low punishment) in which relationships evolve. The empirical rela-
tionship is reproduced as the black line and shaded region. Our baseline 
model  matches  the  dynamics  of  spreads  in  the  data  quite  closely 
along several dimensions. In both model and data, banks price below 
market upon switching, but then steadily charge slightly above-market 
spreads thereafter. Our model correctly captures – both qualitatively 
and in terms of magnitudes – the gradual increase in spreads after 
the ‘‘honeymoon phase’’ following the switch; over the entire three-
year span depicted in Fig.  7, the relative increase in the spread hovers 
between 5 and 15 bps as in data. While the magnitudes vary across 
different institutional contexts, this is also qualitatively consistent with 
the  findings  of  Ioannidou  and  Ongena  (2010)  and  Banerjee  et  al. 
(2021).

When we repeat this exercise for the low elasticity and low pun-
ishment models, the comparison with the data is less favorable. While 
both match the initial drop in spreads by construction, they fail to 
match the data in the subsequent periods in different ways. In the low 
elasticity model, banks leverage high switching costs to take immediate 
advantage  of  their  newly  captive  borrower,  charging  much  higher 

18 It is perhaps natural to think of a true ‘‘switch’’ as the case 𝛿𝑠 = 100%. This 
implementation, however, is far too extreme with a representative borrower: 
a bank with 𝑠 = 0 faces extremely small loan demand under Eq. (5), and so 
prices extremely aggressively to build it up. Empirically, both incumbent and 
switching lenders have portfolios of borrowers, and so the drop in relationship 
intensity we implement must be more marginal.

13 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Fig. 7.  Differences in spreads from switching relative to non-switching loans. Notes: This figure plots the differences in spreads between switching and non-switching loans for 
several model variants and in the data. For detailed descriptions of the construction of this figure, see Section 2.2.2 for the data and Section 5.2 for the model.

spreads than we observe in the data. Spreads remain persistently high 
over the life of the relationship. In the low punishment case, the spreads 
remain low for longer, but the profile does not level off as in the 
data. This is because banks need more time to accumulate sufficient 
relationship capital to increase rates without losing borrowers. Once 
these relationships are built, though, charging higher spreads does not 
erode the relationship as much as in the baseline.

these parameters. It is worth noting that this approach would likely 
have led our estimates of the persistence of lending relationships to 
increase (i.e. for 𝜌𝑞 to decrease and 𝜌𝑠 to increase). This is because the 
low punishment model shares key features in common with the data 
in both experiments: slower rate increases over the first year of the 
relationship in Fig.  7, and a longer right tail of capital buffers in Figure 
D.3 in the Appendix.

5.2.2. Relationships and capital buffers

As  discussed  throughout  Section  5.1,  relationships  interact  with 
financial constraints to shape lending and financing decisions, as well as 
the distribution of banks in the industry. Do these interactions deliver 
financing policies in line with what we see in the data? A key measure 
of  banks’  financing  and  lending  policies  –  and  one  with  important 
implications for financial stability – is how capitalized banks are. This 
is typically measured using the capital buffer, which is the ratio of a 
bank’s equity value to its asset value. Fig.  8 plots the distribution of 
capital buffers in the data, our baseline model, and the competitive 
model. The insights here are similar to those from Table  3 and Fig. 
3. Our baseline model has a strong precautionary motive: the average 
capital buffer is 12.7% compared with 11.7% and 12.3% in the com-
petitive economy and the data, respectively. Furthermore, the greatest 
density of banks occurs at capital buffers in the range of 11 to 15% as 
in the data.

By comparison, these clusters occur elsewhere in each alternative 
model (see Appendix Figure D.3). In the competitive case with smaller 
franchise values, the biggest clusters are at the capital requirement and 
far above the data. In the low elasticity economy, high returns to lend-
ing effectively provide banks insurance against shocks, and so banks 
cluster between 10% and 12%. In the low punishment economy, banks 
with strong relationships retain even lower capital buffers (clustering 
between 8% and 10%), but there is a fat tail resulting from the fact 
that many banks have built up net worth but do not yet have strong 
lending relationships. In the fixed relationship model, capital buffering 
motives blend the baseline model and the competitive model: since the 
distribution of relationships is the same, the shape of the distribution 
matches the baseline, but since many banks with weak relationships 
have no hope to grow them and insure against shocks using relationship 
capital, they pile up at even higher capital buffers.

Takeaways.  Section 5.2 has shown that the model specification with 
parameters (𝜙, 𝜌𝑞) directly estimated from the micro data as described 
in Section 4.2 is better at reproducing untargeted features of the data 
than models with alternative values for each of these parameters. This 
gives us confidence that if we were to use a more traditional macro 
approach to parameter calibration, choosing values to target moments 
such as the evolution of spreads over relationships and the distribution 
of capital buffers, we would have likely arrived at similar values for 

6. Aggregate dynamics

We now analyze how lending relationships shape how the economy 
responds  to  aggregate  shocks.  We  consider  three  types  of  negative 
aggregate shocks: (i) a ‘‘financial crisis’’, where all banks experience 
a proportional decline in their net worth; (ii) a shock to the deposit 
funding cost of banks, ̄𝑞𝑑 , and (iii) a negative shock to loan demand. We 
assume that these are one-time, unanticipated shocks. To keep the dis-
cussion focused, we consider only three of the five model variants from 
the  previous  section:  baseline,  competitive,  and  fixed  relationships. 
Results for the other two model variants are available in Appendix D.4. 
These results are qualitatively similar to the baseline.

6.1. Net worth or ‘‘financial crisis’’ shock

Fig.  9 plots the response of aggregate variables to a negative aggre-
gate shock in which the net worth of every bank unexpectedly declines 
by 25%. This shock is consistent with unexpected losses arising from 
other business lines within the bank, such as mortgage lending and/or 
MBS holdings during the 2007–08 financial crisis. Panels (a) through 
(f) present the effects of the shock on the effective interest rate, total 
lending,  total  net  worth,  average  capital  buffer,  total  deposits,  and 
net dividend payouts, respectively. While the responses are qualita-
tively similar across the economies, there are important quantitative 
differences.

Panels (a) and (b) show that the increase in the effective interest 
rate and corresponding decrease in lending are larger on impact and 
more persistent in the baseline economy than the competitive one. On 
impact, for example, the drop in lending is 24 bps or 150% larger. 
Panel (c) shows that these dynamics allow banks to recapitalize much 
more  quickly  in  the  baseline  (the  initial  drop  in  net  worth  is  the 
same by construction). These results come from banks with stronger 
relationships exploiting the complementarity between relationship and 
financial capital, which they are unable to do in the competitive case. 
Faced with tighter financial constraints, they raise rates on ‘‘captive’’ 
borrowers. Since all banks respond this way, though, and since rela-
tionships evolve based on relative loan volume, in equilibrium there is 
no net erosion of relationships associated with this strategy. As a result, 
this advantage persists over the life of the recovery.

14 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Fig. 8.  Capital buffers and relationships. Notes: This figure represents the distribution of capital buffers across economies. Each is depicted as a probability mass function with 
50 bins between the minimum, 𝜒 = 8%, and 20% (the share of banks with buffers above 20% in negligible in each model). The legend includes the share of banks for whom the 
capital requirement actually binds. The capital buffer is defined as the ratio of book equity to book assets,  𝑔𝑞 (𝑥)𝑔𝓁′ (𝑥)−𝑞𝑑 𝑔𝑑′ (𝑥)
. The data refers to the total capital ratio reported in 
form FR Y-9C (BHCA7205), averaged across the four quarters of 2019.

𝑔𝑞 (𝑥)𝑔𝓁′ (𝑥)

Fig. 9.  Aggregate shock to bank net worth. Notes: This figure plots percent deviations (panels (b), (c), (d), and (e)) or percentage point differences (panels (a) and (f)) from 
steady state. The aggregate shock reduces each bank’s net worth by 25% at date 1.

On impact, banks in both economies replace their net worth with 
deposit financing and cut dividends, with the former effect leading 
to  smaller  capital  buffers  (note  that  the  capital  buffer  depends  on 
the behavior of both lending and net worth). In the economy with 
relationships, though, the faster recovery of bank net worth promotes 
quicker rebuilding of capital buffers. This implies that while lending 
relationships amplify the real effects of the financial shock, they also 
promote financial stability and resilience within the banking sector in 
the subsequent recovery.

The response is materially different in the fixed relationship econ-
omy. Here, as in the baseline, banks exploit market power to recapital-
ize faster, and so the financing patterns in these two cases are similar. 
On the real side, though, the drop in net worth translates into only 
a small (3 bp) increase in the effective interest rate. This is because 

banks in this economy on average retain much larger capital buffers 
than in the baseline model (see Figure D.3 in the Appendix), and so 
there is less pass-through from the financial shock into lending. These 
results suggest that even in economies with the same ‘‘average’’ level 
of market power, the dynamics associated with that market power are 
crucial in shaping the real responses to aggregate shocks.

6.2. Funding cost shock

Fig.  10 considers a negative shock to 𝑞𝑑 , such that banks’ cost of 
funding increases from 2% to 4% (annualized). The shock is persistent 
with 𝜌 = 0.5. This is a stylized way of modeling a monetary policy shock 
and studying its transmission through the bank lending channel in the 

15 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Fig. 10.  Aggregate shock to cost of funding. Notes: This figure plots percent deviations (panels (b), (c), (d), and (e)) or percentage point differences (panels (a) and (f)) from 
steady state. The aggregate shock raises the cost of funding 𝑟𝑑

ann from 2% to 4% at date 1, returning to 2% with persistence 0.5.

context of our model.19 This exercise is similar to the one performed by 
Wang et al. (2022), among others.

The baseline and competitive economies respond similarly on the 
real side. Banks largely pass the increased cost of funding through to 
borrowers, yielding a persistent increase (drop) in loan rates (volumes). 
Thus both models generate standard transmission of monetary policy to 
quantities of credit, which affects real activity via the working capital 
constraint.

While almost all (94.5%) of the increase in funding costs is passed 
through in the competitive case, this pass-through is muted in the rela-
tionship model (63.2%).20 The former result arises because net interest 
margins are razor thin in the competitive model: just 0.2% in steady 
state, 90% lower than in the baseline. The latter result arises because, in 
the relationship model, well-capitalized banks – i.e. those with greater 
capital buffers and less direct dependence on deposit financing – seize 
on this shock and their relatively advantageous financial position as an 
opportunity to build relationships. As a result, these banks raise interest 
rates  by  less.  This  dampens  the  upward  pressure  on  the  effective 
interest  rate  ̃𝑅  through  both  the  level  and  covariance  components. 
Notably, this latter effect is shut down in the fixed relationship model 
since there is no incentive to build relationships. Therefore, in this case 
the real response in the fixed relationship model more closely resembles 
the competitive model than the baseline.21

19 Of course, the monetary policy (Federal Funds) rate and banks’ marginal 
cost of funds (i.e. the deposit rate) are not exactly the same thing. However, as 
documented, for example, in Drechsler et al. (2017) and Wang et al. (2022), 
there is strong co-movement between the two objects. To facilitate discussion, 
however, in this section we use the terms funding cost shock and monetary 
policy shock synonymously.
20 We measure ‘‘pass-through’’ as the increase in  ̃𝑅𝑡 relative to the increase 
in the funding rate 1∕𝑞𝑑 .
21 It is worth noting that models of static market power may be calibrated 
to deliver lower levels of pass-through as in the data (see, for example, Wang 
et al. (2022)). Since this is not the primary focus of our analysis in this paper, 
though, our fixed relationship model is calibrated to be comparable to our 
baseline model (same average spreads), not to generate this feature of the 
data.

Raising the relative cost of deposit financing promotes the build-up 
of capital buffers, and so bank net worth rises in all three economies. 
Banks substitute away from deposits and into retained earnings to fund 
their loans as long as the funding cost remains elevated. As part of 
this substitution, banks cut dividends and/or issue equity (depending 
on their initial net worth position). Given the substantial gap in profit 
margins, though, this effect is much more pronounced in the baseline 
and fixed relationship models: for example, the increase in net worth 
(capital buffers) peaks at 11.7% (12.0%) above steady state in the 
baseline model, as opposed to 2.6% (6.8%) in the competitive model, 
and the relative drop in total dividends on impact is −3.3 pp as opposed 
to −0.5 pp.

Ultimately, the pass-through of a funding cost shock to the loan 
market plays out similarly in the three economies, but is relatively 
muted in the baseline relative to both the competitive and fixed rela-
tionship models. The nature of competition generates stark differences 
in how capital buffers react to a tightening of monetary policy, which 
has natural implications for financial stability.

6.3. Loan demand shock

Fig.  11 plots the effects of a persistent contraction in loan demand, 
modeled as a 1% drop in TFP 𝐴 with a persistence of 0.5. The headline 
result is that the presence of lending relationships sharply dampens the 
contraction in loan volume (and therefore output) associated with the 
drop in TFP in the baseline model relative to both the competitive and 
fixed relationship models. Whereas the equilibrium loan rate drops only 
0.29 pp on impact in the competitive model and 0.04 pp in the fixed 
relationship model, it drops 2.21 pp in the baseline. This translates into 
an initial drop in total lending that is 35.0% smaller in the baseline 
economy than the competitive one.

The  bolstering  of  lending  we  observe  in  the  relationship  model 
arises from banks’ dynamic incentives: despite lending being less prof-
itable today given the drop in aggregate demand, banks would still 
like to improve their relative position by lending more to build and 
maintain relationships for tomorrow. As in the case of the funding cost 
shock above, since the primary difference between the baseline and 
competitive economies arises from banks’ dynamic incentives, the fixed 

16 

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Fig. 11.  Aggregate shock to loan demand. Notes: This figure plots percent deviations (panels (b), (c), (d), and (e)) or percentage point differences (panels (a) and (f)) from steady 
state. The aggregate shock lowers TFP by 1% at date 1, recovering with persistence 0.5.

relationship economy – with no such incentives, despite market power 
as in the baseline – more closely resembles the competitive economy.
Turning to financing, this sharp drop in profitability in the rela-
tionship model causes a much larger and more persistent contraction 
in banks’ net worth than in the competitive model. This drop in net 
worth, however, is smaller in magnitude than the drop in lending, 
and so capital buffers increase on net. This drop in net worth occurs 
despite cuts in deposits and dividends: taken together, these results 
imply that the drop in net worth is driven by lending unprofitably 
in the early aftermath of the initial shock. By contrast, banks in the 
competitive model respond to the negative shock to loan demand by 
simply  shrinking:  they  cut  their  deposit  base  and  increase  dividend 
payouts. Clearly this difference in response stems from the fact that the 
competitive banks have no reason to lend at undesirable terms absent 
dynamic relationship considerations. While relationships temper the 
impact of the shock on the real side, this happens with no appreciable 
cost to financial stability (as measured by capital buffers), despite the 
amplified contraction in bank net worth.

6.4. Summary and analysis of surplus

A key theme emerges from the analysis of the three shocks across 
the three models considered above: the dynamic incentives associated 
with  the  form  of  market  power  in  our  baseline  model  of  lending 
relationships make it behave materially differently than either the com-
petitive model or the fixed relationships model with only static market 
power. We can support this insight, documented via real effects and 
financing patterns in Figs.  9 through 11, by measuring economic sur-
plus across agents in the model relative to steady state for each shock. 
This also allows us to compare the total costs of each shock across 
economies. Concretely, we modify the analysis from Section 5.1.4 by 
computing our surplus metrics as of the impact date of the shock.22 
The results of this analysis are presented in Table  4.

22 Specifically, we replace the bank and firm steady state values 𝑉  and 𝑊
with 𝑉1 and 𝑊1, where, for example,

𝑊𝑡 = 𝐴𝑘𝛼

𝑡 𝑛𝜂

𝑡 − 𝑤𝑛𝑡 − 𝑢𝑐𝑘𝑡 + 𝐿𝑡+1 − ∫ 𝓁𝑡(𝑞, 𝑠)d𝜇𝑡−1(𝑞, 𝑠)

comp
(ii)

Table 4
Analysis of surplus across aggregate shocks.
  Shock
  Model

Funding cost
Base
(iv)

Net worth
comp Fixed 
Base
Fixed
(ix)  
(viii)
(i)
(iii)
−0.3  
  Bank value −5.7 −23.1 −7.4
−0.2  
  Firm value −0.0 −0.3
−0.0
  Total value −0.3 −0.5
−0.2  
−0.3
Notes: Each moment is the percentage point difference in the indicated value from 
the date of impact of the shock relative to the steady state for the indicated model 
economy.

−0.5 −0.2
−0.0 −0.1
−0.0 −0.1

−1.9 −1.0
−0.1 −0.1
−0.2 −0.2

comp Fixed
(v)

−0.2
−0.1
−0.0

Base
(vii)

TFP

(vi)

Since all these shocks are negative by construction, both banks and 
firms lose relative to steady state in all cases. For banks, unsurprisingly 
the net worth shock is particularly acute, resulting in losses in value 
of more than 5% relative to steady state in each case. The effect is 
especially strong (23.1%) in the competitive model, which makes sense 
because banks in this model cannot increase spreads to absorb the loss 
of financial capital. Since banks recapitalize faster recapitalization and 
steady state firm values are lower in the less competitive models, there 
are only small reductions in firm value relative to the steady state. This 
furthers the idea that bank market power – captured in franchise value 
– has benefits for financial stability.

While  the  effect  sizes  for  the  funding  cost  and  TFP  shocks  are 
smaller, the results are intuitive. As discussed in Section 6.2, both the 
competitive and fixed relationship models exhibit high rates of pass-
through of the increase in funding costs to borrowers. Therefore, in 
these cases, the reduction in bank value is small relative to the baseline, 
while the reduction in firm value is large relative to the baseline. The 
effects are largely reversed in the case of the TFP shock: in this case, 
banks with dynamic relationships as in the baseline have incentive to 
dampen the reduction in credit demand to build relationships, which 
is costly in the short term. Therefore the loss in value to banks is 

−

𝜙
2

𝐿𝑡+1 ∫

( 𝑞𝓁𝑡+1(𝑞, 𝑠)
𝐿𝑡+1

)2

− 1 − (𝑠 − 𝑆)

d𝜇𝑡(𝑞, 𝑠) + 𝑞𝑊 𝑡+1

.

17 

 
K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

appreciably larger in the baseline model than in either the competitive 
or fixed relationship model.

Declaration of competing interest

7. Conclusion and directions for future research

This paper presents a quantitative framework with which to eval-
uate the aggregate consequences of lending relationships. Our model 
environment combines standard features from the literature on hetero-
geneous banks subject to financial constraints with two novel elements: 
(i) loan sourcing adjustment costs for borrowers; and (ii) internalization 
of relationship formation by banks. These elements yield a tractable 
but rich model of relationships which is amenable to direct estimation 
of key relationship parameters and efficient computation, despite the 
richness of heterogeneity and financing choices within the banking 
sector.

Quantitatively, we present four primary results. First, our baseline 
model matches the profile of interest rate spreads over the life of a 
bank–borrower relationship that we observe in the data. Our model gets 
both the static and dynamic components of the market power which 
arises from relationships right, as model variants which vary either 
element struggle to match this empirical profile. Second, we show that 
financial and relationship capital are complements at the bank level 
and therefore correlated in the equilibrium distribution of banks in 
the model. Third, we show that the equilibrium relationship between 
the degree of lending relationships and the strength of banks’ capital 
buffers  is  non-monotone:  our  baseline  model  features  stronger  pre-
cautionary motives than both more and less competitive alternatives. 
Fourth, we show that relationships shape both the real and financial 
impacts of aggregate shocks to both credit supply and credit demand.
Our analysis suggests several promising directions for future re-
search. The first is related to two important long-terms in the U.S. 
banking industry. Over the past several decades, the commercial bank-
ing industry has consolidated, and alternative non-bank financial in-
termediaries (shadow banks, ‘‘fintech’’) have grown. On the one hand, 
industry consolidation directly leads to reduced competition (which 
could  translate  in  a  lower  ‘‘punishment’’  parameter  𝜌𝑞,  or  a  lower 
elasticity 𝜙), but this effect could be counteracted by the increasingly 
diverse geographical footprint of major U.S. bank holding companies 
(Oberfield et al., 2024). Thus it is possible that the U.S. banking indus-
try has become a more competitive oligopoly, which could contribute to 
a rise in 𝜌𝑞 or 𝜙. On the other hand, the emergence of new digital-only 
lenders, such as the case of many fintech companies, could reduce the 
importance of relationships in banking, as lending terms and decisions 
are increasingly determined by centralized algorithms. Our framework 
is well-suited to measuring the aggregate impacts of these forces along 
this transition.

Second, the fact that different countries’ banking sectors are struc-
tured in ways very different from the U.S. might imply different in-
teractions  between  relationship  capital  and  financial  frictions  than 
those described in the present paper, which was intended to model 
the U.S. banking sector. For example, it is well-documented that the 
Canadian banking sector is considerably more consolidated than the 
U.S. financial sector. Third, our results on aggregate dynamics suggest 
a rich interplay between relationships and bank capitalization, which 
could have important implications for regulation and financial stability. 
We leave these and other avenues for future research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kyle Dempsey: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, 
Formal  analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization.  Miguel  Faria-e-
Castro: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualiza-
tion, Software, Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, 
Data curation, Conceptualization.

18 

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104083.

Data availability

A Quantitative Analysis of Bank Lending Relationships (Dempsey and
Faria-e-Castro) (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Adrian, Tobias, Boyarchenko, Nina, 2012. Intermediary Leverage Cycles and Financial 

Stability. Staff Reports 567, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Amiti, Mary, Weinstein, David E., 2018. How much do idiosyncratic bank shocks affect 
investment? Evidence from matched bank-firm loan data. J. Political Econ. 126 (2), 
525–587.

Atkeson, Andrew G., d’Avernas, Adrien, Eisfeldt, Andrea L., Weill, Pierre-Olivier, 2019. 
Government guarantees and the valuation of American banks. NBER Macroecon. 
Annu. 33 (1), 81–145.

Banerjee, Ryan N., Gambacorta, Leonardo, Sette, Enrico, 2021. The real effects of 

relationship lending. J. Financ. Intermediation 48 (C).

Baron, Matthew, 2020. Countercyclical bank equity issuance. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 

4186–4230.

Berger, Allen N., Hannan, Timothy H., 1998. The efficiency cost of market power in 
the banking industry: A test of the quiet life and related hypotheses. Rev. Econ. 
Stat. 80 (3), 454–465.

Berger, Allen N., Udell, Gregory F., 1995. Relationship lending and lines of credit in 

small firm finance. J. Bus. 68 (3), 351–381.

Bigio, Saki, Bianchi, Javier, 2022. Banks, Liquidity Management, and Monetary Policy. 

Boualam,  Yasser,  2018.  Credit  Markets  and  Relationship  Capital.  Working  Paper, 

Econom. 90, 391–454.

Kenan-Flagler Business School.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Eichenbaum, Martin, Evans, Charles L., 2005. Nominal rigidi-
ties and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy. J. Political Econ. 113 
(1), 1–45.

Corbae, Dean, D’Erasmo, Pablo, 2021. Capital requirements in a quantitative model of 

banking industry dynamics. Econom. 89 (6), 2975–3023.

Darmouni, Olivier, 2020. Informational frictions and the credit crunch. J. Financ. 75 

(4), 2055–2094.

Degryse, Hans, De Jonghe, Olivier, Jakovljević, Sanja, Mulier, Klaas, Schepens, Glenn, 
2019.  Identifying  credit  supply  shocks  with  bank-firm  data:  Methods  and 
applications. J. Financ. Intermediation 40 (C).

Demsetz, Rebecca, Strahan, Philip E., Saidenberg, Marc R., 1996. Banks with Something 

to Lose: the Disciplinary Role of Franchise Value. Econ. Policy Rev. 1–14.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Rev. 

Econ. Stud. 51 (3), 393–414.

Drechsler,  Itamar,  Savov,  Alexi,  Schnabl,  Philipp,  2017.  The  Deposits  Channel  of 

Monetary Policy. Q. J. Econ. 132 (4), 1819–1876.

Egan, Mark, Hortaçsu, Ali, Matvos, Gregor, 2017. Deposit Competition and Financial 
Fragility: Evidence from the US Banking Sector. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 169–216.
Faria-e-Castro, Miguel, Paul, Pascal, Sanchez, Juan M., 2024. Evergreening. J. Financ. 

Econ. 153 (C).

Farinha, Luísa A., Santos, Joao, 2002. Switching from single to multiple bank lending 
relationships: Determinants and implications. J. Financ. Intermediation 11 (2), 
124–151.

Fernández de Guevara, Juan, Maudos, Joaquín, Pérez, Francisco, 2005. Market power 

in European banking sectors. J. Financ. Serv. Res. 27 (2), 109–137.

Gilchrist,  Simon,  Schoenle,  Raphael,  Sim,  Jae,  Zakrajsek,  Egon,  2017.  Inflation 

Dynamics during the Financial Crisis. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (3), 785–823.

Gourio, François, Rudanko, Leena, 2014. Customer Capital. Rev. Econ. Stud. 81 (3), 

1102–1136.

Hennessy,  Christopher  A.,  Whited,  Toni  M.,  2005.  Debt  dynamics.  J.  Financ.  60, 

1129–1165.

Ioannidou, Vasso, Ongena, Steven, 2010. Time for a change: Loan conditions and bank 

behavior when firms switch banks. J. Financ. 65 (5), 1847–1877.

Kimball, Miles S., 1995. The quantitative analytics of the basic neomonetarist model. 

J. Money, Credit. Bank. 27 (4), 1241–1277.

K. Dempsey and M. Faria-e-Castro

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104083 

Prescott, Edward Simpson, Janicki, Hubert P., 2006. Changes in the size distribution 

of U.S. banks: 1960–2005. Econ. Q. (fall), 291–316.

Ravn, Morten, Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, Uribe, Martín, 2006. Deep Habits. Rev. Econ. 

Stud. 73 (1), 195–218.

van  Binsbergen,  Jules  H.,  Diamond,  William  F.,  Grotteria,  Marco,  2022.  Risk-free 

interest rates. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 1–29.

Wang, Yifei, Whited, Toni M., Wu, Yufeng, Xiao, Kairong, 2022. Bank market power 
and monetary policy transmission: Evidence from a structural estimation. J. Financ. 
77 (4), 2093–2141.

Neri, Andrea Geraliand Stefano, Sessa, Luca, Signoretti, Federico M., 2010. Credit and 
banking in a DSGE model of the euro area. J. Money, Credit. Bank. 42, 107–141.
Oberfield, Ezra, Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Trachter, Nicholas, Wenning, Derek T., 2024. 
Banks  in  Space.  NBER  Working  Papers  32256,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, Inc.

Payne, Jonathan, 2018. The Disruption of Long Term Bank Credit. Working Papers 

2018–2, Princeton University. Economics Department..

Petersen, Mitchell A.., Rajan, Raghuram G., 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: 

Evidence from small business data. J. Financ. 49 (1), 3–37.

Polo, Alberto, 2021. Imperfect Pass-Through to Deposit Rates and Monetary Policy 

Transmission. Bank of England working papers 933,, Bank of England.

19 

