Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Do intermediaries improve GSE lending? Evidence from proprietary GSE 
data(cid:73)
Joshua Bosshardt a, Ali Kakhbod b, Amir Kermani b,c,∗
a Federal Housing Finance Agency, United States
b UC Berkeley Haas Business School, United States
c NBER, United States

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We analyze the trade-offs of having intermediaries originate government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgages 
using proprietary GSE data. We first find evidence of lenders pricing for observable and unobservable default 
risk independently of the GSEs. We then develop and estimate a model of competitive lending in which 
lenders have skin-in-the-game and conduct additional screening beyond the GSEs’ criteria. Lenders reduce 
costs via screening but also charge markups. On net, interest rates are higher compared to a counterfactual 
effectively without intermediaries. In an extension, the observed differences between banks and nonbanks are 
more consistent with differences in their skin-in-the-game rather than screening quality.

Dataset link: Replication of "Do Intermediaries I
mprove GSE Lending? Evidence from Proprieta
ry GSE Data" (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G21
G23

Keywords:
Mortgage lenders
Underwriting risk
Overlays
Nonbanks

1. Introduction

Mortgage debt is by far the largest component of household debt 
in the U.S., accounting for more than 70% of the $16.5 trillion in 
household liabilities (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2022). Ac-
cess to mortgage credit significantly depends on the prevailing credit 
profiles in the mortgage market segment supported by the government-
sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs)  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  which 
comprises the majority of originations since the financial crisis.1 In 
this  market  segment,  access  to  credit  depends  on  two  factors:  the 
GSEs’ underwriting criteria as implemented through their respective 
automated underwriting systems (Desktop Underwriter for Fannie Mae 
and Loan Prospector for Freddie Mac) and potential additional restric-
tions or ‘‘overlays’’ imposed by private mortgage lenders, which serve 
as intermediaries by originating the loans that the GSEs eventually 
securitize.2

Considering that the GSEs provide insurance against mortgage de-
fault risk and the progress made on the automated underwriting sys-
tems, a critical question arises: What extra value do intermediaries’ 
discretionary overlays and pricing of mortgages offer? We specifically 
focus on a trade-off in which intermediaries can reduce the cost of 
lending by screening out borrowers who are more likely to default 
relative  to  their  easily  observed  risk  characteristics  (such  as  credit 
score, loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, and debt-to-income (DTI) ratio), but 
they  also  charge  markups.  We  study  the  welfare  of  different  types 
of borrowers under the current arrangement versus a counterfactual 
setting effectively without intermediaries.

We study the trade-off between better screening and lenders’ market 
power using proprietary regulatory data on all loans acquired by the 
GSEs during 2016–2017, a period during which we can precisely ob-
serve the guarantee fees, or g-fees, that the GSEs charge to insure a loan. 

(cid:73)

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. This paper supersedes ‘‘The Value of Intermediaries for GSE Loans.’’ We are grateful to Philipp Schnabl 
and an anonymous referee for their feedback and suggestions, which greatly improved the paper. We also thank Darren Aiello, Bob Avery, Matteo Benetton, 
Greg Buchak, Justin Contat, Len Costa, Will Doerner, Robert Dunsky, Mehran Ebrahimian, Ben Hébert, Erica Jiang, Dmitry Livdan, Karen Pence, David Sraer, 
Constantine Yannelis, Tim Zhang, and numerous seminar and conference participants. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not 
necessarily those of the Federal Housing Finance Agency or the U.S. Government. Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors.

∗ Corresponding author at: UC Berkeley Haas Business School, United States.

E-mail addresses:  joshua.bosshardt@fhfa.gov (J. Bosshardt), akakhbod@berkeley.edu (A. Kakhbod), kermani@berkeley.edu (A. Kermani).

1 In this paper, ‘‘the GSEs’’ refers to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and not any other government-sponsored enterprises.
2 We focus on the role of intermediaries at loan origination and not subsequent servicing or other investor activity.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104082
Received 15 August 2024; Received in revised form 16 April 2025; Accepted 20 April 2025
Available online 9 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

We first provide reduced-form evidence that intermediaries price ob-
servable and unobservable risk independently of the GSEs. These facts 
collectively  suggest  that  intermediaries  have  some  skin-in-the-game 
and perform additional screening. However, we also find evidence of 
significant markups charged by the lenders. We then develop a model of 
competitive lending by intermediaries in which lenders perform costly 
screening but also have market power. We estimate the parameters 
based on the moments from the reduced form observations. We then use 
the model to study the interest rates and denial rates that different type 
of households would face if we changed the current system to a new 
one effectively without intermediaries, i.e., a system in which lending 
decisions are solely determined by the GSEs’ underwriting criteria and 
competitive pricing.

As a first step to study the trade-offs of how intermediaries shape 
mortgage lending, we start our reduced-form analysis by showing that 
interest rates increase with measures of ex-ante observable default risk. 
We define observable risk as the probability of default predicted by a 
borrower’s credit score, LTV ratio, and DTI ratio. We rely on variation 
of interest rates net of g-fees for loans offered by the same lender 
and within the same ZIP code and show that a one percentage point 
increase in observable risk is associated with a 4.2 basis point increase 
in interest rates net of g-fees. This result is consistent with lenders 
having skin-in-the-game, or a positive loss given default, due to the 
threat of repurchases and exclusion from the GSEs.3 We also look at 
the distribution of interest rates as a function of observable risk and 
find that the gap between the average and the 10th percentile (or 
between the 90th percentile and the 10th percentile) of interest rates 
for the safest borrowers is 23 (49) basis points. This gap suggests that 
GSE intermediaries exploit significant market power. Moreover, we find 
that the 10th (90th) percentile increases by 1.4 (5.1) basis points for 
each one percentage point increase in observable risk. The difference 
between the slope of the average versus the 10th percentile of interest 
rates  as  a  function  of  observable  risk  disciplines  the  parameters  of 
the model to disentangle between lenders’ skin-in-the-game and the 
correlation between lenders’ market power and borrowers’ observable 
risk. Although statistically significant, the association between interest 
rates net of g-fees and observable risk is modest in magnitude, as we 
determine that a 1 standard deviation increase in observable risk leads 
to a $4.29 increase in monthly principal and interest rate payments 
for a typical loan in our sample. This result highlights that the costs 
associated with lenders’ skin-in-the-game are small compared to the 
variation of interest rates within observable risk that may be due to 
lender markups.

For robustness, we also use data from the National Survey of Mort-
gage Originators (NSMO) to show that the correlation between interest 
rates net of g-fees and observable risk continues to hold when control-
ling for borrowers’ shopping behavior and financial sophistication. We 
also consider lenders’ total origination revenue – instead of the interest 
rate net of g-fees – and show that the correlation between lender pricing 

3 A ‘‘repurchase’’, sometimes also referred to as a ‘‘put-back’’, refers to 
when  a  GSE  requires  a  lender  to  repurchase  a  loan  based  on  charges 
of  violating  representations  and  warranties,  which  can  be  interpreted  as 
errors  in  the  underwriting  process  required  for  delivering  a  loan  to  the 
GSEs.  The  rate  of  repurchases  increased  during  the  financial  crisis  but 
has  since  remained  low.  Nevertheless,  a  2015  survey  by  Fannie  Mae  in-
dicates  that  as  many  as  40%  lenders  who  deliver  loans  to  the  GSEs  (or 
Ginnie  Mae)  and  60%  of  lenders  who  originate  loans  through  whole-
sale  channels  apply  overlays  of  some  kind,  citing  repurchase  risks  and 
costs associated with purchasing and servicing loans that have higher de-
fault risks as the primary motivations (2015Q2 Mortgage Lender Sentiment 
Survey, https://www.fanniemae.com/sites/g/files/koqyhd191/files/migrated-
files/resources/file/research/mlss/pdf/mlss-july2015-presentation.pdf).  Addi-
tionally, Fuster et al. (2024) present evidence that lenders increased their 
investment  in  careful  underwriting,  consistent  with  increased  aversion  to 
repurchases.

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

and observable risk is not affected by the use of discount points and 
lender credits. In particular, origination revenue incorporates a lender’s 
income from selling loans on the secondary market (which is a function 
of the interest rate on the mortgage) as well as upfront fees, and it 
does not depend on the distribution of income from these two sources.4 
We also find that our results are robust to controlling for observable 
prepayment risk, which is a borrower’s estimated probability of pre-
payment as a function of the credit score, LTV ratio, DTI ratio, and 
loan amount.

We next show that, even after adjusting for observable borrower 
characteristics, mortgage interest rates net of g-fees are predictive of 
defaults, which we attribute to residual unobservable risk. In particular, 
a one percentage point increase in the interest rate net of g-fees is asso-
ciated with a 47 basis point and statistically significant increase in the 
default rate conditional on observable risk, which is substantial relative 
to the overall default rate in the sample of 50 basis points. This result 
is robust to capturing observable risk via not only credit scores, LTV 
ratios, and DTI ratios but also an extensive set of characteristics of the 
borrower (e.g., household demographics), loan (e.g., loan purpose and 
amount), and property (e.g., value). This result suggests that lenders 
conduct additional screening beyond these characteristics to determine 
the risk spread, which could involve improving their risk assessment 
models or allocating more labor hours to careful loan processing.

For robustness, we show that the correlation between defaults and 
interest rates is not driven by reverse causation (i.e., the impact of 
interest rates on delinquencies). Specifically, we use the variation in 
interest rates on fixed rate mortgages caused by cross-subsidizations 
and discontinuities in g-fees and show that the causal impact of interest 
rate on delinquencies is negligible.5

Finally, we also investigate the extensive margin using loan applica-
tion data. Even when restricting to applications that are accepted by the 
GSEs’ automated underwriting systems, lenders’ likelihood to deny an 
application increases by 1.92 percentage points for each one percentage 
point increase in observable risk.

Equipped with the above empirical findings, we develop and esti-
mate a model of imperfectly competitive mortgage lending with costly 
screening technology that explains these observations. We then lever-
age the model to extract insights about the trade-offs of having interme-
diaries originate GSE mortgages. The model has three key ingredients. 
First, motivated by evidence of lenders pricing for observable – and 
unobservable – risk, lenders in the model face a positive expected loss 
given default. Second, motivated by evidence of lenders also pricing 
for default risk that is not captured by observable risk characteristics, 
lenders in the model can implement further screening. Third, lenders 
can charge markups due to limited shopping by borrowers (Woodward 
and Hall, 2012, Alexandrov and Koulayev, 2018).

Specifically, in the model, we focus on mortgages that are accept-
able to the GSEs. Lenders engage in costly screening to draw a signal 
correlated with consumers’ default risk, which affects lenders’ costs 
since they retain a positive expected loss given default. Based on the 
estimated risk of default, lenders determine which consumers to deny 
and the cost of lending for consumers they accept. Lenders can also 
charge markups since consumers shop at a limited number of lenders 
and choose one, or forgo taking out a mortgage at all, based on a 
combination of lenders’ interest rate offers and idiosyncratic preference 
shocks. Lenders determine their interest rate offers and how much to 
screen by maximizing expected profits.

4 We find that the 10th percentile, average, and 90th percentile of origina-
tion revenue on average increases by 34 basis points (as a percentage of the 
loan amount), 44 basis, and 59 basis points, respectively, for each percentage 
point increase in observable risk.

5 The association between defaults and lender pricing is also robust to using 

origination revenue instead of the interest rate net of g-fees.

J. Bosshardt et al.

We leverage the model to compare the status quo, in which lenders 
exercise  discretionary  overlays  and  pricing,  to  a  counterfactual  ef-
fectively  without  intermediaries.  That  is,  in  this  counterfactual,  all 
applications that are accepted by the GSEs’ underwriting criteria are 
offered  a  loan  with  a  zero-profits  interest  rate  conditional  on  the 
borrower’s observable risk. For example, we discuss how the counter-
factual could be implemented by a combination of removing repurchase 
risks and standardizing mortgage applications through a platform that 
verifies  borrowers’  information,  determines  their  eligibility  for  GSE 
loans, and disseminates the anonymous borrower information to many 
lenders. While the platform might still involve lenders that disburse the 
funds, they would have little to no ability to implement discretionary 
screening or pricing. The results of our estimation suggest that, absent 
intermediaries’ screening, the amount of delinquencies would approx-
imately triple, which would increase the marginal cost of borrowing 
by a similar amount on average over different levels of observable 
risk. However, this benefit is outweighed by the average 25 basis point 
markup charged by the intermediaries. Our estimations suggest that 
switching to the counterfactual would decrease the average interest 
rates for the borrowers in the bottom (top) decile of observable risk 
by 23 (22) basis points.

While the primary question of this paper concerns the costs and 
benefits of intermediaries in general, an extension of the model with 
heterogeneous lenders speaks to observed differences between bank 
and nonbank lenders of GSE loans. In recent years, nonbanks’ market 
share of GSE loans grew from 17% in 2011 to 42% in 2017. This 
growth not only affects the lending behavior of nonbanks themselves, 
but  it  also  has  important  implications  for  the  pricing  and  lending 
decisions of banks. Consistent with Buchak et al. (2018), Kim et al. 
(2018), and Kim et al. (2022), we observe that nonbanks are associated 
with greater observable risk and greater interest rates conditional on 
observable risk. But more importantly, we find that as the market share 
of nonbanks increased over time, they exhibited increasingly higher ex-
post defaults. For example, the difference in two-year default rates of 
nonbanks compared to banks, conditional on observable characteristics, 
grew from 7.2 basis points in 2013 to 19.4 basis points by 2017.

An  extension  of  the  model  with  heterogeneous  lenders  suggests 
that the observed differences between banks and nonbanks are more 
consistent with fundamental differences in their expected loss given 
default  rather  than  either  type  of  lender  having  any  screening  ad-
vantage. In particular, the observation that nonbanks are associated 
with higher observable risk and higher default rates, conditional on 
observable risk, is consistent with them having a lower expected loss 
given default. By contrast, differences in screening costs generate a 
smaller and opposite correlation between observable and unobservable 
risk. A lower loss given default and a higher screening cost both cause 
lenders to screen less efficiently, resulting in less informative signals 
about a consumer’s default risk. The key difference is that a lower 
loss given default also allows a lender to charge a lower interest rate 
conditional on a given signal of a consumer’s risk. The lower interest 
rate attracts more consumers, and this effect becomes more pronounced 
as observable risk increases.6 In the model, the increasing market share 
of nonbanks from 2013 to 2017 can be emulated by supposing that 

6 One explanation for the difference in the expected loss given default is 
that banks more often have an incentive to protect rents from other business 
lines. By contrast, nonbanks, which typically have a monoline business model, 
may perceive declaring bankruptcy as a less costly limit on losses. For example, 
nonbanks exhibited lower rates of repurchases of risky loans they originated 
during the housing boom. In particular, within the set of originations from 
2003 to 2008, 1.42% of the loans delivered by banks have been repurchased 
compared to only 0.62% of the loans delivered by nonbanks. This difference 
may have been due to nonbanks failing or being sold to banks during the crisis 
(e.g., Buchak et al., 2018) and thus not being liable to further penalties from 
the GSEs. Nonbanks also generally face lower regulatory scrutiny.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

nonbanks exhibited relative reductions in the loss given default and 
funding costs and became more preferred by consumers.

This paper contributes to three major themes in the literature. First, 
it discusses determinants and implications of access to credit in the 
U.S. mortgage market. This body of work encompasses, for example, 
lender financing (e.g., Jiang, 2023), the GSEs’ automated underwriting 
systems (e.g., Johnson, 2022), technology (e.g., Jiang et al., 2023), 
regulations (e.g., DeFusco et al., 2020, Fuster et al., 2021), repurchases 
and  servicing  costs  (e.g.,  Goodman,  2017),  fair  pricing  and  credit 
allocation  by  region  (e.g.,  Hurst  et  al.,  2016  and  Kulkarni,  2016), 
and capacity constraints (e.g., Fuster et al., 2024). We contribute by 
providing evidence that lenders price for risk on GSE loans in a manner 
that is independent of the GSEs’ g-fees, consistent with an intensive 
margin of overlays.

Second,  this  paper  contributes  to  the  literature  on  the  role  of 
nonbanks in mortgage lending (e.g., Buchak et al., 2018, Kim et al., 
2018, Gete and Reher, 2020, Kim et al., 2022, Benson et al., 2023, 
and Buchak et al., 2024), including fintechs in particular (e.g., Fuster 
et al., 2019, Jagtiani et al., 2021, and Berg et al., 2022). Based on our 
model, we conclude that the observed differences between banks and 
nonbanks are more consistent with nonbanks having a lower expected 
loss given default rather than advantages in screening quality.

Third, our study contributes to the literature on competition and 
financial market outcomes. This literature covers competition among 
financial intermediaries, including banks versus banks (e.g., Egan et al., 
2017), banks versus nonbanks (e.g., Benetton et al., 2022), fintechs 
versus  other  intermediaries  (e.g.,  Di  Maggio  and  Yao,  2021),  and 
algorithmic versus human underwriting processes (e.g., Jansen et al., 
2021). It also covers the effects of mortgage lender concentration on 
monetary policy transmission (e.g., Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2016) 
and  fees  (e.g.,  Buchak  and  Jørring,  2021),  competitive  frictions  in 
mortgage relief programs (e.g., Agarwal et al., 2022, Amromin and 
Kearns, 2014), the relationship between competition and underwriting 
quality (e.g., Yannelis and Zhang, 2023), the effects of competition in 
the business lending market (e.g., Beyhaghi et al., 2022), the effects 
of competition on adverse selection (e.g., Mahoney and Weyl, 2017), 
and welfare (e.g., Lester et al., 2019). The paper also contributes to the 
literature on screening with data acquisition, such as the rise of screen-
ing and big data technologies (e.g., Farboodi and Veldkamp, 2020). We 
add to this literature by showing that noncompetitive markups on GSE 
loans outweigh the cost reduction due to screening, resulting in higher 
interest rates compared to a counterfactual in which the discretionary 
behavior of lenders is eliminated.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes 
the  institutional  background  and  data.  Section  3  provides  evidence 
that  lenders  charge  risk  spreads  on  GSE  loans,  consistent  with  an 
intensive margin of overlays. Section 4 develops and estimates a model 
in which lenders’ discretionary overlays result from conducting addi-
tional screening beyond the GSEs’ underwriting criteria and retaining 
positive losses given default. Section 5 compares the estimated model 
to a counterfactual effectively without intermediaries and shows that 
the  discretionary  behavior  of  lenders  leads  to  higher  interest  rates 
due  to  substantial  markups  outweighing  the  cost-saving  benefits  of 
screening. Section 6 extends the analysis to lender types and shows 
that the observed differences between banks and nonbanks are more 
consistent with differences in their expected loss given default rather 
than screening quality. Section 7 concludes.

2. Institutional background and data

2.1. Institutional background

We focus on mortgage loans acquired by the GSEs. Lenders can 
deliver a conventional (i.e., not government insured) mortgage to the 
GSEs if the loan amount does not exceed the corresponding conforming 
loan  limit  value  and  the  loan  is  accepted  by  the  GSEs’  automated 

3 

J. Bosshardt et al.

underwriting systems. The GSEs can purchase individual loans for cash, 
in which case they pool loans into mortgage-backed securities (MBS), 
or they can also directly swap pools of loans for mortgage-backed secu-
rities. The GSEs guarantee investors of the mortgage-backed securities 
against the default risk of the underlying mortgages.

As payment for the guarantee, the GSEs charge a guarantee fee or 
g-fee. The g-fee for a loan typically contains an ongoing component, 
which is charged as an annual rate, and an upfront component, which 
is charged as a percentage of the loan amount. The ongoing component 
largely depends on the loan’s general product type (such as fixed rate or 
adjustable rate), whereas the upfront component depends more on the 
loan’s specific risk characteristics. The upfront g-fee is the sum of com-
ponents described in each GSE’s respective matrix.7 A base component 
for all loans with terms greater than 15 years depends on the loan-to-
value (LTV) ratio and credit score.8 Other components can depend on 
features of the loan (such as the loan purpose) or the property (such as 
the occupancy type), among other factors. Our measure of the total g-
fee, expressed as an annualized rate, combines the ongoing and upfront 
components by converting the upfront component to an annualized rate 
using the loan’s present value multiplier, which is estimated by the 
loan’s guaranteeing GSE based on the expected duration of the loan.

Lenders obtain an origination revenue net of the g-fee, which can 
be expressed as a percentage of the loan amount. Similar to Zhang 
(2022), we compute origination revenue as the sum of two components: 
upfront closing costs and secondary marketing income. Closing costs 
is measured by origination charges net of lender credits, which we 
obtain by merging with the recently expanded HMDA data. Secondary 
marketing income is the present value of the deviation of a loan’s 
interest rate net of g-fees relative to par, similar to the price of financial 
intermediation in Fuster et al. (2024). We compute it by subtracting 
the current coupon yield on GSE-guaranteed MBS9 as of the origination 
date from the interest rate net of the total g-fee and multiplying by the 
respective present value multiplier (PVM):10

secondary marketing income

= (interest rate − total g-fee − MBS yield) ∗ PVM

(1)

Our computation of secondary marketing income is slightly different 
from Fuster et al. (2024) and Zhang (2022) in that we determine the 
premium relative to par using the loan’s guaranteeing GSE’s estimated 
present value multiplier rather than prices in the secondary market. De-
spite this difference, we find similar aggregate statistics. For example, 
we find that the average secondary marketing income during 2018 was 
3.22% (Table B.2 in Internet Appendix B), which is consistent with the 
finding in Fuster et al. (2024) that the price of financial intermediation 
averaged 1.42% during 2008–2014 while also exhibiting an average 
upward trend of 0.32% per year, assuming a similar trend continued 
from  2014  to  2018.  Also,  the  average  total  origination  revenue  in 

7 See https://singlefamily.fanniemae.com/media/9391/display for the most 
recent matrix for Fannie Mae, which refers to the upfront g-fee as loan-level 
price adjustments. See https://guide.freddiemac.com/euf/assets/pdfs/Exhibit_
19.pdf for the most recent matrix for Freddie Mac, which refers to the upfront 
g-fee as credit fees. Note that the current matrix no longer coincides with 
the  matrix  during  the  sample  period.  See  https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/
Reports/ReportDocuments/GFee-Report-2021.pdf for general information from 
the Federal Housing Finance Agency g-fee report.

8 While the upfront g-fee is generally increasing in default risk, it may 
not price for risk perfectly. In particular, the matrix is consistent with cross-
subsidization of relatively risky borrowers (with high LTV ratios and low credit 
scores) by relatively less risky borrowers (with low LTV ratios and high credit 
scores). This is not a problem for our analysis, which focuses on the component 
of interest rates determined by lenders rather than the GSEs.
9 Data comes from the Bloomberg series ‘‘MTGEFNCL’’.
10 If we split up the g-fee into the ongoing and upfront components, then 
this  is  also  equivalent  to:  secondary marketing income = (interest rate −
ongoing g-fee − MBS yield) ∗ PVM − upfront g-fee.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

our sample is 3.98%, which is similar to the average of 4.6% during 
2018–2019 reported by Zhang (2022), especially after accounting for 
the fact that we additionally subtract out the upfront g-fee (which on 
average is equal to 0.63% in our sample).

We consider how lenders’ interest rates and origination revenues 
vary with observable default risk as well as ex-post defaults condi-
tional on observable risk. In the context of our analysis, default refers 
to a 90-day delinquency within 2 years of origination. We compute 
observable risk as the estimated probability of default based on eas-
ily observable characteristics, including determinants of the upfront 
g-fee (credit score and LTV) as well as the debt-to-income (DTI) ra-
tio. Specifically, it is the predicted value of a regression of default 
(multiplied  by  100)  on  the  interaction  of  credit  score  bins  corre-
sponding to thresholds in the upfront g-fee (less than 620, 620-639, 
640-659, 660-679, 680-699, 700-719, 720-739, and 740 or greater), 
LTV bins corresponding to thresholds in the upfront g-fee (60% or less, 
60.01%–70%, 70.01%–75%, 75.01%–80%),11 and DTI bins correspond-
ing to quintiles.12 When referring to the credit score for a loan, we 
use the representative credit score that is used to determine the g-
fee. The representative credit score is the minimum of each borrower’s 
representative score, which is either the lower score if there are two 
scores or the middle score if there are three.

In an extension of our analysis, we examine how observable risk, 
interest rates, and defaults correlate with different types of lenders. 
In the context of our analysis, banks refers to depositories, nonbanks 
refers to lenders that are not banks, and fintechs refers to lenders with 
a mostly online application process. We use the designation of fintechs 
from Buchak et al. (2018). Note that all fintechs are nonbanks, so we 
can further distinguish fintechs from nonbank-nonfintechs in order to 
have non-intersecting categories.

2.2. Data

We use data from the Mortgage Loan Information System (MLIS), 
which is a proprietary regulatory dataset at the Federal Housing Fi-
nance Agency (FHFA) consisting of all loans acquired by the GSEs.13 
The aggregate results in the tables and figures of this paper do not 
contain any confidential or personal identifiable information.

For our baseline sample, we focus on originations during 2016–2017. 
We  start  in  2016,  which  is  when  precise  data  on  g-fees  becomes 
available, and we end at 2017 because we consider 2-year default rates 
and do not want to extend into the COVID-19 pandemic. For the results 
regarding origination revenue, we use the sample of originations during 
2018, which we merge with the expanded HMDA data to obtain infor-
mation on origination charges.14 Note that observable risk in 2018 is 
computed based on the model estimated from the baseline 2016–2017 
sample rather than the 2018 sample to avoid systematic changes in 
2-year default rates associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.

We focus on a subsample of loans for which the upfront portion of 
the g-fee approximately only depends on the LTV ratio and credit score. 
In particular, we restrict to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out 
refinance loans for one-unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached 

11 Note that we restrict to loans with an LTV ratio up to 80%, as discussed 
later in the data description in Section 2.2.
12 The thresholds defining the DTI bins are as follows: 24.13%, 31.06%, 
37.3%, and 43.01%.
13 Note  that  GSE  loans  account  for  more  than  90%  of  the  total  origi-
nation volume of conventional conforming loans meeting analogous sample 
restrictions to those in our main sample. This fraction is computed using the 
National Mortgage Database, a representative sample of residential mortgages 
maintained by the FHFA and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
14 We implement an exact merge based on the following characteristics: loan 
amount rounded to the nearest $5,000, interest rate, year, loan purpose, term, 
and census tract. We omit observations in either dataset which are identical 
based on these characteristics.

4 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

houses. We also exclude high balance loans exceeding the national 
baseline conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate financing, and 
loans with an LTV ratio exceeding 80%. Finally, within the resulting 
set, we restrict to loans where the total upfront g-fee is within 25 basis 
points of the component determined by LTV and credit score. The last 
restriction drops about 6% of observations and accounts for cases where 
there may be other determinants of the g-fee that we cannot precisely 
observe.

Table B.1 in Internet Appendix B presents summary statistics for the 
baseline 2016–2017 sample, and Table B.2 presents summary statistics 
for the 2018 sample. Note that continuous variables are winsorized at 
1%.

3. Empirical findings

This section shows that interest rates net of g-fees are positively 
associated with observable risk and unobservable risk (i.e., default risk 
conditional on observable risk). It also shows that denials of mortgage 
applications increase with observable risk. These results suggest that 
lenders price for observable and unobservable risk independently of 
the GSEs, an interpretation we build upon in the following sections to 
analyze the costs and benefits of intermediaries for GSE loans.

3.1. Interest rates and observable risk

We start with examining the correlation between mortgage rates 

and observable risk. We estimate a regression of the form 

(𝐼𝑅 − 𝑔𝑓 𝑒𝑒)𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖 + 𝛿 × 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖

(2)

where (𝐼𝑅 − 𝑔𝑓 𝑒𝑒)𝑖 is interest rates net of g-fees for mortgage 𝑖, 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖
is observable risk, 𝑋𝑖 is a vector of controls (which includes ZIP code 
by  year-quarter  fixed  effects,  mortgage  seller  by  year-quarter  fixed 
effects, loan amount deciles indicators, and an indicator for full income 
and asset documentation in our baseline specification, while additional 
robustness specifications also include controls for discount points, rate 
lock date fixed effects, measures of consumer shopping behavior and 
mortgage knowledge, and measures of prepayment propensity), and 𝜖𝑖
is the error term.

We focus on the 𝛽 coefficient. The null hypothesis is that lenders 
effectively retain no exposure to default risk and therefore, after con-
trolling for other determinants of markups and lending cost, there is no 
association between interest rates (net of g-fees) and observable risk. 
Alternatively, if lenders have some exposure to default risk (or skin-in-
the-game), such as due to the threat of put-backs and the risk of losing 
future business with the GSEs, then interest rates net of g-fees will be 
positively correlated with observable risk.

Fig.  1 shows that observable risk is positively associated with in-
terest  rates,  even  after  subtracting  out  the  g-fee.  Similarly,  column 
(1) of Table  1 shows that interest rates are positively associated with 
observable risk while also controlling for ZIP code by year-quarter fixed 
effects and seller by year-quarter fixed effects, where the assignment of 
year-quarter is based on the origination date and the seller refers to 
the entity that sold the loan to the GSEs. Column (2) shows that the 
association is not significantly affected by including additional controls, 
including loan amount decile indicators and an indicator for full income 
and asset documentation. Decomposing the components of observable 
risk, column (3) shows that interest rates are negatively associated 
with the credit score and positively associated with the loan-to-value 
(LTV) ratio and the debt-to-income (DTI) ratio. Columns (4) through 
(6) show that most of these associations are only partially mitigated by 
subtracting out the total g-fee. Based on the estimate in column (5), 
a 1 percentage point increase in the ex-ante probability of default is 
associated with a 4.2 basis point increase in the interest rate net of 
g-fees.

To illustrate the magnitude, note that in our sample the average 
loan amount is approximately $230,000 and the average interest rate 

Fig. 1.  Interest rates and observable risk.
This figure presents a binned scatterplot of the interest rate and the interest rate net 
of the total g-fee on observable risk while controlling for origination year-month fixed 
effects. Observable risk is the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, 
loan-to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1.
Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac),2016–2017, 
restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-
unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans 
exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate financing, loans with 
a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from 
the first table of the g-fee matrix by more than 25 basis points.

is about 4%, resulting in a monthly principal and interest payment 
of  $1,098  for  a  30-year  loan.  An  increase  of  observable  risk  by  1 
standard deviation (about .77 percentage points) results in a 3.234 
(= .77 × 4.2) basis point increase in the interest rate. This leads to a 
$4.29 rise in monthly principal and interest payments, which amounts 
to only about 0.39% of the total monthly payment. Although small 
in magnitude, the statistically significant positive association provides 
evidence that lenders internalize a cost associated with default. In our 
model in Section 4, this cost creates an incentive lenders engage in 
additional screening, which results in the observed association being 
smaller compared to a counterfactual without such screening.

To compare the pricing for observable risk with other determinants 
of  interest  rates,  such  as  markups,  Fig.   2  shows  the  average,  10th 
percentile,  and  90th  percentile  of  interest  rates  net  of  g-fees  as  a 
function of observable risk.15 To remove fluctuations in interest rates 
and enable pooling over the sample period, we focus on the spread 
relative to the best available rates in a given week, as approximated by 
the 10th percentile of interest rates net of g-fees for the borrowers in 
the lowest quartile of observable risk for that week. The 10th percentile 
of this spread at a given level of observable risk plausibly corresponds 
to the lowest markups.16 We find that the 10th percentile increases 

15 For ease of comparison of the slopes, Figure C.1 in Internet Appendix 
C.1 presents a version of Fig.  2 where the average, 10th percentile, and 90th 
percentile are shifted so that each starts at zero for borrowers with the lowest 
observable risk.
16 Consistent with the interpretation that the variation in interest rates for a 
given level of observable risk largely reflects markups, Figure C.2 in Internet 
Appendix C.1 shows that the variation is similar even when restricting to a 
set of mortgages that are relatively straightforward to underwrite: (no cash-
out) refinance mortgages where no borrowers are self-employed, there is full 
income and asset documentation, the LTV ratio is no greater than 70% (which 
limits the probability of facing constraints due to the appraisal), and the loan 
amount is greater than the 25th percentile or about $146,000 (which reduces 
hurdles to low balance lending such as high fixed costs relative to revenue). 
Additionally, to better control for lender characteristics, Figure C.3 shows that 
the variation in interest rates is largely similar even after subtracting out 

5 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Fig. 2.  Interest rates and observable risk: average and dispersion.
This figure shows the 10th percentile, 90th percentile, and average of the spread of the 
interest rate net of the total g-fee relative to the best available rate for approximate 
deciles of observable risk. The best available rate is determined by computing the 10th 
percentile of the interest rate net of the total g-fee for the borrowers in the lowest 
quartile of observable risk in each week (i.e., observable risk less than 12.5 basis 
points for the average week). Observable risk is the estimated probability of default 
based on the credit score, loan-to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in 
Section 2.1.
Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac),2016–2017, 
restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-
unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans 
exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate financing, loans with 
a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from 
the first table of the g-fee matrix by more than 25 basis points.

with observable risk at a rate of 1.4 basis points for a 1 percentage 
point increase in observable risk, which we determine by estimating 
a quantile regression of the spread of the interest rate net of g-fees 
relative to the best available rates on observable risk and partialling 
out by the same fixed effects and controls as in column (5) of Table  1. 
The fact that the 10th percentile increases with observable risk suggests 
that markups do not fully account for the association between interest 
rates and observable risk. However, the shallower slope compared to 
the average suggests that markups also increase with observable risk.

The positive association between interest rates net of g-fees and 
observable risk suggests that lenders independently price for default 
risk. One potential motivation is the threat of repurchases. We find that 
repurchases occur more frequently for loans with greater observable 
risk (Figure C.4 in Internet Appendix C.1). While the ex-post rate of 
repurchases is relatively small (.025% for all loans, or about ten times 
that rate for defaulting loans), several pieces of evidence suggest that 
lenders  respond  meaningfully  to  the  ex-ante  threat.  A  2015  survey 
by Fannie Mae indicates that as many as 40% lenders who deliver 
loans to the GSEs (or Ginnie Mae) and 60% of lenders who originate 
loans through wholesale channels apply overlays of some kind, citing 
repurchase risks and costs associated with purchasing and servicing 
loans  that  have  higher  default  risks  as  the  primary  motivations.17 
Additionally, increased aversion to the ex-ante threat of repurchases is 
consistent with evidence of lenders increasing their investment in care-
ful underwriting during the period of tightening regulatory oversight 

the average among loans in the lowest quartile of observable risk for each 
lender, lender while restricting to nonbanks, or lender-state while restricting 
to nonbanks.
17 These  findings  are  based  on  the  2015Q2  Mortgage  Lender  Sentiment 
Survey,  which  can  be  accessed  here:  https://www.fanniemae.com/sites/g/
files/koqyhd191/files/migrated-files/resources/file/research/mlss/pdf/mlss-
july2015-presentation.pdf.

6 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

following the crisis (Fuster et al., 2024). This inference is based on 
rising personnel costs, especially for ‘‘back end’’ operations including 
underwriting, and decreasing loan closings per employee. Furthermore, 
the publicly available 2021Q1 Mortgage Bankers Performance Report 
released by the Mortgage Bankers Association indicates that expenses 
associated with repurchase reserve provisioning are as much as 2% 
of net production income, again suggesting that lenders are willing 
to bear costs to handle the threat of repurchases that are relatively 
large compared to the ex-post rate of repurchases.18 Finally, besides 
repurchases, lenders also face the risk of losing the ability to do business 
with the GSEs (e.g., Keys et al., 2012). Section 4 explains these results 
with a model of mortgage lender competition in which lenders bear a 
positive expected loss given default.

We  offer  several  additional  pieces  of  evidence  that  support  the 
interpretation that lenders price for default risk and rule out alternative 
explanations.

Discount points.  One potential alternative explanation is that riskier 
borrowers could be more likely to select discount points and lender 
credits  in  a  way  that  results  in  lower  upfront  costs  in  return  for 
higher interest rates. However, Figure C.5 in Internet Appendix C.1 
shows using the 2018 sample that total origination revenue, which 
is invariant with respect to the division of revenue between upfront 
and ongoing charges, is positively associated with observable risk. It 
also shows that the closing costs and secondary market components 
of origination revenue both generally increase with observable risk, 
although the latter is much stronger and appears to drive the overall 
association between origination revenue and observable risk. Table C.1 
shows that the associations between observable risk and either closing 
costs or secondary marketing income are statistically significant while 
controlling  for  the  full  set  of  fixed  effects  and  controls.  They  also 
generally hold for each of the factors that contribute to observable 
risk. Finally, even if we do not consider origination revenue, Table C.2 
shows that simply controlling for discount points less lender credits 
as a percentage of the loan amount has little effect on the association 
between interest rates and observable risk.

Interest rate fluctuations.  Another interpretation is that borrowers with 
greater observable risk may be more likely to apply for a mortgage 
when interest rates are high. Our baseline specification partially con-
trols for this by including ZIP code by year-quarter fixed effects, but 
it does not control for short-term fluctuations of interest rates within 
a quarter. To better investigate this explanation, we merge our sample 
from MLIS to data on interest rate locks from Optimal Blue, which has 
the precise lock date. Table  2 shows that the results are similar when 
controlling for lock rate date fixed effects.19

Shopping.  Another  possibility  is  that  observable  risk  could  be  neg-
atively correlated with measures of financial sophistication, such as 
shopping and financial knowledge, which have been associated with 
lower interest rates (Bhutta et al., 2021, Malliaris et al., 2021). How-
ever, Fig.  2 shows that the 10th percentile of interest rates, which 
plausibly reflects the most aggressive shoppers for a given level of 
observable risk, still increases with observable risk. To further investi-
gate this alternative explanation, we examine the association between 

18 The Mortgage Bankers Performance Report is based on the Mortgage 
Bankers  Financial  Reporting  Form,  which  nonbank  lenders  submit  to  the 
GSEs and Ginnie Mae. It summarizes aggregated information for lenders that 
volunteer to participate.
19 Generalizing these results from the GSE segment of the market, Table 
C.3 in Internet Appendix C.1 shows using the Optimal Blue data that risk 
characteristics  also  appear  to  be  priced  in  loans  insured  by  government 
agencies, including the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA), and Department of Agriculture (USDA). Note that we 
do not include observable risk as a regressor since we estimate observable risk 
based on GSE loans, which are generally less risky.

−0.063*** 
(−120.08)  
−0.020*** 
(−9.55)
0.120***  
(50.20)
875,464  
0.697
Yes
Yes
Yes

−0.060*** 
(−51.35)  
−0.016*** 
(−3.55)
0.101***  
(19.54)
132,745  
0.825
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

J. Bosshardt et al.

Table 1
Interest rates and observable risk.

  Observable risk

  Credit score

  LTV

  DTI

(1)
IR

0.152***
(349.96)

(2)
IR

0.149***
(340.94)

(3)
IR

−0.216***
(−353.79)
0.324***
(141.79)
0.107***
(41.12)

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

(4)
IR-gfee

0.047***
(130.55)

(5)
IR-gfee

0.042***
(123.41)

(6)
IR-gfee

875,464
0.681
Yes
Yes
Yes

875,464
0.674
Yes
Yes
No

  Observations
  𝑅2
  ZIP ×Year-quarter FE
  Seller ×Year-quarter FE
  Controls
Note: Column (1) regresses the interest rate on observable risk while controlling for ZIP code by year-quarter fixed effects and seller by year-quarter fixed effects. Observable risk 
is the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, loan-to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1. Column (2) adds the following controls: 
loan amount decile indicators and an indicator for full income and asset documentation. Column (3) regresses the interest rate on the credit score, loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, and 
debt-to-income (DTI) ratio (each divided by 100). Columns (4), (5), and (6) are analogous except that the dependent variable is the interest rate net of the total g-fee. T-statistics 
computed using robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates 
significance at the 1% level. Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac), 2016–2017, restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out 
refinance loans for one-unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate 
financing, loans with a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from the first table of the g-fee matrix by more than 25 basis points.

875,464
0.670
Yes
Yes
No

875,464
0.696
Yes
Yes
Yes

875,464
0.680
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 2
Interest rates and observable risk with lock date fixed effects.

  Observable risk

  Credit score

  LTV

  DTI

(1)
IR

0.144***
(137.28)

(2)
IR-gfee

0.043***
(50.68)

(3)
IR-gfee

0.041***
(53.94)

(4)
IR-gfee

132,871
0.736
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

  Observations
  𝑅2
  ZIP ×Year-quarter FE
  Seller ×Year-quarter FE
  Lock date FE
  Controls
Note: Column (1) regresses the interest rate on observable risk while controlling for ZIP code by year-quarter fixed effects, seller by year-quarter fixed effects, and the following 
controls: loan amount decile indicators and an indicator for full income and asset documentation. Observable risk is the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, 
loan-to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1 (based on the model estimated using the MLIS sample). Column (2) is similar except that the dependent 
variable is the interest rate net of the total g-fee. Column (3) includes lock date fixed effects. Column (4) is similar to column (3) except regressing the interest rate on the credit 
score, loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, and debt-to-income (DTI) ratio (each divided by 100). T-statistics computed using robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates 
statistical significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates significance at the 1% level. Source: MLIS merged with Optimal Blue rate lock 
data, 2016–2017, restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-unit, owner-occupied, single-family houses and excluding high balance loans 
exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans with subordinate financing.

132,762
0.759
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

132,745
0.825
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

interest rates and observable risk using data from the National Survey 
of Mortgage Originations (NSMO). The NSMO asks recent mortgage 
borrowers about their views and experiences related to obtaining their 
mortgage. The NSMO is conducted on a small subset of loans in the 
National Mortgage Database (NMDB). The NMDB is a proprietary 5% 
representative  sample  of  closed-end  first-lien  mortgages  in  the  U.S. 
maintained by the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) and the 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The NMDB is based on credit 
bureau data and has precise information about the borrower’s interest 
rate and observable risk characteristics. We use an internal version of 
the NSMO data at the FHFA that links the NSMO responses to all the 
characteristics in the NMDB.

We measure shopping based on an indicator for seriously consid-
ering or applying to at least two lenders (which is positive for 54.2% 
of observations) and an indicator for gathering information (‘‘A little’’ 
or ‘‘A lot’’) from sources other than the providing lender, including 
other lenders and brokers, websites, and friends, relatives, coworkers 
(which is positive for 77.6% of observations). Similar to Bhutta et al. 
(2021), we measure financial knowledge using an index based on the 

borrower’s self-assessed ability to explain various mortgage concepts: 
the process of taking out a mortgage, the difference between fixed- 
and adjustable- rate mortgages, the difference between interest rate 
and APR, amortization, and consequences of not making a required 
payment. We assign a score of 1, 2, or 3 for each mortgage concept 
depending  on  whether  the  borrower  could  explain  it  ‘‘Not  at  all’’, 
‘‘Somewhat’’, or ‘‘Very’’, sum the scores for the different concepts, and 
then  normalize  the  distribution  to  have  a  mean  of  0  and  standard 
deviation of 1.

Table  3 shows the results. As a benchmark, columns (1) and (2) first 
show that interest rates and interest rates net of g-fees increase with 
observable risk in the NSMO sample.20 Columns (3) through (5) then 

20 Note that for the NMDB sample we impute the g-fee by supposing 40 
basis points for the ongoing portion and computing the risk-varying portion 
based on the first table of the GSEs’ g-fee matrix and using a multiplier of 6 
to convert the upfront charge to an annualized rate. On the MLIS sample, we 
find that this imputed g-fee is generally very close to the recorded g-fee.

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Table 3
Interest rates and observable risk controlling for shopping and financial knowledge.

  Observable risk

  Considered or applied to ≥ 2

  Gathered information

  Index of mortgage knowledge

  Applied to > 1 because concerned

(1)
IR

0.233***
(14.76)

(2)
IR-gfee

0.040***
(2.74)

(3)
IR-gfee

0.039***
(2.74)
−0.032***
(−3.28)

(4)
IR-gfee

0.039***
(2.73)
−0.025**
(−2.51)
−0.024**
(−2.04)

(5)
IR-gfee

0.036**
(2.48)
−0.021**
(−2.09)
−0.026**
(−2.18)
−0.018***
(−3.59)

(6)
IR-gfee

0.030**
(2.05)
−0.029*** 
(−2.81)
−0.026**  
(−2.25)
−0.017*** 
(−3.45)
0.084***  
(3.44)

4,408
0.626
Yes

4,408
0.609
Yes

  Observations
  𝑅2
  State ×Year-quarter FE
Note: Column (1) regresses the interest rate on observable risk while controlling for state by year-quarter fixed effects. Observable risk is the estimated probability of default based 
on the credit score, loan-to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1. Column (2) is similar to column (1) except subtracting an imputed g-fee as a function 
of credit score and LTV based on the first table of the GSEs’ g-fee matrix. Column (3) adds an indicator for seriously considering or applying to at least 2 lenders. Column (4) 
adds an indicator for obtaining information from other lenders, the internet, or friends, relatives, or coworkers. Column (5) adds an index of mortgage knowledge as described 
in Section 3.1, normalized to have a standard deviation of 1. Column (6) adds an indicator for a borrower that applies to more than one lender due to concern over qualifying 
for a loan. T-statistics computed using robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% 
level, and *** indicates significance at the 1% level. Source: National Survey of Mortgage Originations, 2013–2017, restricting to GSE-acquired, fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or 
no cash-out refinance loans for one-unit, owner-occupied, site-built properties and excluding high balance loans exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate 
financing, and loans with a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%.

4,408
0.610
Yes

4,408
0.611
Yes

4,408
0.612
Yes

4,408
0.614
Yes

show that this association is robust to including measures of shopping 
and financial knowledge. Similar to Bhutta et al. (2021), we observe 
that measures of shopping and financial knowledge are associated with 
lower interest rates. Finally, motivated by the finding in Agarwal et al. 
(2020) that borrowers may be willing to accept high interest rates due 
to fear of rejection, column (6) includes an indicator for a borrower 
that applies to multiple lenders due to concern over qualifying for a 
loan. We find that interest rates net of g-fees are positively associated 
with this indicator, but they are also still positively and significantly 
related  to  observable  risk.  Table  C.4  in  Internet  Appendix  C.1  fur-
ther shows that observable risk is negatively correlated with financial 
knowledge and positively associated with applying to multiple loans 
due to concern over qualifying for a loan.

Prepayment risk.  The association between interest rates and observable 
risk  could  potentially  be  driven  by  pricing  for  prepayment  risk.21 
However, we account for prepayments in the following ways. First, 
one potential determinant of prepayment speed is the loan amount, as 
borrowers with smaller loans may be less likely to refinance because 
closing costs are a larger fraction of the principal balance. We account 
for this channel by controlling for the loan amount. Second, borrowers 
may use negative discount points to reduce their closing costs while 
taking on a higher interest rate, which tends to be associated with 
higher prepayment rates (Zhang, 2022). Figure C.5 and Table C.1 in 
Internet  Appendix  C.1  account  for  this  channel  by  considering  the 
total origination revenue, as discount points only shift the closing cost 
and secondary marketing income components of origination revenue 

21 Lenders may have an incentive to charge higher interest rates for loans 
with a greater probability to prepay to compensate for the fact that prepay-
ment terminates the servicing contract, reducing the value of the associated 
mortgage servicing rights. Additionally, from the point of view of investors 
of GSE mortgage-backed securities, prepayment and default have a similar 
impact on payouts in that both curtail total interest payments. As a result, a 
greater tendency to prepay could decrease the value of a loan in the secondary 
market  if  it  is  sold  in  a  specified  pool.  Based  on  publicly  available  data 
from SIFMA, about 93.5% of trading volume for mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS) guaranteed by the GSEs during our sample period occurred in the 
to-be-announced  market,  a  forward  market  in  which  the  traded  securities 
are determined after the trade. However, specified pools, in which the exact 
securities are determined at the time of trade, can be a more lucrative option 
for securities with a lower risk of prepayment when interest rates decline (Gao 
et al., 2017).

without affecting the total. Third, we directly control for observable 
prepayment risk, which is defined analogously to observable risk except 
based on prepayment within 2 years. We also allow observable prepay-
ment risk to depend on decile indicators for the loan amount. Table 
C.5 in Internet Appendix C.1 shows that observable prepayment risk 
has little effect on the association between interest rates and observable 
risk.

Fallout risk.  Lenders could potentially charge higher interest rates to 
observably risky borrowers to compensate for fallout risk, which refers 
to the possibility that a borrower who starts an application does not 
complete it. These incomplete applications impose a cost of lenders’ 
resources that is not directly related to the credit risk of the loan. 
We measure fallout based on rate locks in Optimal Blue that are not 
matched to completed transactions MLIS. We restrict to conforming 
loans in Optimal Blue satisfying analogous sample restrictions as our 
main MLIS sample. Note that our designation of fallout is imprecise 
since, in addition to true fallout cases, it also includes loans that are 
kept in portfolio and failed matches in the merge between Optimal 
Blue and MLIS. However, most loans in Optimal Blue are unlikely to 
be held in portfolio since the Optimal Blue platform from which the 
data is sourced is mostly used by nonbank lenders (Bhutta et al., 2021), 
which tend to securitize the vast majority of their originations. All 
things considered, based on our measure of fallout, we find an average 
fallout rate of about 40%, which does exceed the average fallout rate of 
about 25% based on the publicly available 2021Q1 Mortgage Bankers 
Performance  Report  released  by  the  Mortgage  Bankers  Association. 
Having noted these caveats, we find a U-shaped association between 
our  measure  of  fallout  and  observable  risk  (Figure  C.6  in  Internet 
Appendix C.1).22 Therefore, it is unlikely that fallout risk can explain 
the monotonic relationship between interest rates and observable risk 
we find in Fig.  1.

22 One  potential  explanation  for  the  downward-sloping  part  is  that  safe 
borrowers might shop more aggressively. If we run a specification like column 
(1) of Table C.4 in Internet Appendix C.1 but restrict to borrowers that do not 
report applying to multiple lenders due to concern about qualifying for a loan, 
we find that a 1 percentage point increase in observable risk is associated with 
a 5.3 percentage point lower chance of considering or applying to at least 2 
lenders, which is statistically significant at 5%.

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Present value multiplier.  The GSEs’ present value multiplier (PVM) that 
we use to convert upfront components of the g-fee to an annualized rate 
could introduce measurement error when computing interest rates net 
of g-fees. Internet Appendix C.4 provides detailed information about 
the variation of the PVM in our sample. We show that the PVM has 
a  negative  correlation  with  observable  risk,  which  tends  to  reduce 
the  association  between  interest  rates  net  of  g-fees  and  observable 
risk compared to an only time-varying PVM. We also show that the 
association between interest rates net of g-fees and observable risk is 
robust to variation in the PVM, such as imputing the PVM based on the 
25th and 75th percentile in the origination year-quarter. Finally, we 
show that the association is largely similar if we derive an alternative 
PVM based on the slope of prices in the to-be-announced (TBA) market 
with respect to coupon rates.

Lender fixed effects.  We include fixed effects for the mortgage seller to 
the GSE, which need not coincide with the originator. We observe that 
about 31% of loans in our sample are originated via the correspondent 
channel  in  which  the  loan  is  originated  by  a  correspondent  lender 
and then sold to an aggregator, which then sells it to the GSEs. We 
implement three approaches for identifying originators, as distinct from 
sellers, and in each case show that our results are robust to including 
the associated fixed effects. Columns (1) and (2) of Table C.6 in Internet 
Appendix C.1 are similar to columns (5) and (6) of Table  1 in the 
paper except that we restrict to loans originated via retail or broker 
channels, in which case the lender and seller of the mortgage to the 
GSEs coincide. In other words, this restriction excludes loans originated 
via the correspondent channel. Columns (3) and (4) replace the seller 
identifier with the legal entity identifier (LEI) for the originator, which 
is available for about 28% of loans in the sample. Columns (5) and 
(6) instead use Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry 
(NMLS) identifiers for the originator. The results are generally similar 
to Table  1.

Cross-selling.  One possible explanation for our findings is cross-selling. 
For  example,  banks  could  offer  lower  rates  to  borrowers  who  are 
more likely to purchase other services, such as other loans or deposit 
accounts. Cross-selling is less likely for nonbank lenders since they 
typically only offer mortgage loans and no other products. We can 
therefore effectively test the robustness of our results to cross-selling by 
restricting to nonbanks. Columns (1) and (2) of Table C.7 in Internet 
Appendix C.1 are similar to columns (5) and (6) of Table  1 in the paper 
except that we restrict to nonbank sellers. We find that the association 
between interest rates and observable risk is materially the same as 
the full sample. The remaining columns employ two approaches for 
identifying  nonbank  originators  (as  distinct  from  nonbank  sellers), 
which is not a native field in our data. Columns (3) and (4) restrict to 
nonbank sellers and additionally restrict to the 69% loans in our sample 
that were originated via retail or broker channels, in which case the 
lender and seller of the mortgage to the GSEs coincide. After applying 
this  restriction,  the  coefficient  is  slightly  smaller  compared  to  the 
baseline specification but remains statistically significant and generally 
of similar magnitude. Columns (5) and (6) instead restrict to nonbank 
originators as identified based on the legal entity identifier (LEI). We 
link  the  LEI  to  the  reporter  panel  from  the  2018  HMDA,  which  is 
the first year that HMDA reports the LEI, and identify nonbanks as 
lenders identifying as an ‘‘independent mortgage banking subsidiary’’. 
Although the sample size is smaller due to the limited availability of 
the LEI in our data, the coefficients are generally similar to the other 
columns.

3.2. Interest rates and default conditional on observable risk

Whereas the last section focused on the relationship between in-
terest rates and ex-ante observable risk, this section focuses on the 
relationship between interest rates and unobservable risk, as measured 

Fig. 3.  Interest rates and default.
This figure presents a binned scatterplot of default (multiplied by 100) on the interest 
rate net of the total g-fee while controlling for origination year-month fixed effects 
and observable risk, as well as a version that does not control for observable risk. 
Observable risk is the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, loan-
to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1.
Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac),2016–2017, 
restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-
unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans 
exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate financing, loans with 
a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from 
the first table of the g-fee matrix by more than 25 basis points.

by ex-post defaults while controlling for observable risk. We estimate 
a regression of the form 

𝐷𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽(𝐼𝑅 − 𝑔𝑓 𝑒𝑒)𝑖 + 𝛾𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖 + 𝛿 × 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖

(3)

where 𝐷𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 indicates a 90-day delinquency within 2 years of orig-
ination and the remaining variables are the same as in Eq.  (2). We 
focus on the 𝛽 coefficient, which represents the extent to which interest 
rates predict default. We hypothesize that if lenders are both exposed 
to default risk and conduct independent screening beyond the GSEs’ 
criteria, then the coefficient on 𝛽 should be positive. In particular, if 
lenders only judged default risk based on the standard characteristics 
included in our observable risk measure, then 𝛽 should be zero after 
controlling for those characteristics, provided that our controls also 
capture any mutual correlates of interest rates and defaults conditional 
on observable risk.

Fig.  3 shows that interest rates net of g-fees are positively associated 
with default rates, even after controlling for observable risk. Similarly, 
column  (1)  of  Table   4  shows  that  interest  rates  are  predictive  of 
default while also controlling for ZIP code by year-quarter fixed effects. 
Column (2) shows that this relationship continues to hold even after 
controlling for observable risk. The estimate in column (2) indicates 
that a 1 percentage point increase in the interest rate net of g-fees is 
associated with a 47 basis point increase in the default rate conditional 
on observable risk, which is substantial compared to the overall default 
rate of 50 basis points.

Column (3) shows that the association between interest rates net 
of g-fees and defaults is robust to controlling for a finer measure of ob-
servable risk consisting of the interaction between 10-point credit score 
bins (starting at 620, with an additional indicator for all credit scores 
below 620), 5% loan-to-value bins (starting at 60%, with an additional 
indicator for all loan-to-value ratios below 60%), and debt-to-income 
decile  indicators.  It  is  also  robust  to  simultaneously  controlling  for 
a host of additional easily observable characteristics, including loan 
amount decile indicators; an indicator for full income and asset docu-
mentation; income decile indicators; family type indicators (i.e., single 
female, single male, or more than 1 borrower); indicators for Black 

9 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Table 4
Interest rates and default.

  IR - g-fee

  Observable risk

  IR - g-fee ×Risky

  Observable risk ×Risky

  IR

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

(1)
Default

1.057***
(21.76)

(2)
Default

0.471***
(10.11)
0.924***
(40.44)

(3)
Default

0.419***
(8.61)

(4)
Default

0.112***
(3.49)
0.786***
(5.87)

(5)
Default

0.650***
(7.69)
0.928***
(33.13)

(7)
Default

0.890*** 
(36.53)  

(6)
Default

0.112***
(3.48)
0.786***
(5.87)
0.538***
(5.95)
0.142
(1.04)

0.370*** 
(7.99)
875,464  
0.163
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Full

426,296
0.223
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Risky

409,879
0.230
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Safe

875,464
0.163
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Full

875,464
0.155
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Full

875,464
0.166
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Full

  Observations
  𝑅2
  ZIP ×Year-quarter FE
  ZIP ×Year-quarter ×Risky FE
  Seller ×Year-quarter FE
  Seller ×Year-quarter ×Risky FE
  Controls
  Sample
Note: Column (1) regresses an indicator for default (multiplied by 100) on the interest rate net of the total g-fee while controlling for ZIP code by year-quarter fixed effects and 
seller by year-quarter fixed effects. Column (2) adds observable risk as a regressor. Observable risk is the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, loan-to-value 
ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1. Column (3) instead includes the following controls: the interaction between 10-point credit score bins (starting at 620, 
with an additional indicator for all credit scores below 620), 5% loan-to-value bins (starting at 60%, with an additional indicator for all loan-to-value ratios below 60%), and 
debt-to-income decile indicators (note that this interaction absorbs observable risk); loan amount decile indicators; an indicator for full income and asset documentation; income 
decile indicators; family type indicators (i.e., single female, single male, or more than 1 borrower); indicators for Black and Hispanic borrowers; appraisal value decile indicators; 
an indicator for a refinance loan; an indicator for self-employed borrowers; and an indicator for first-time homebuyers. Column (4) estimates the specification in column (2) except 
restricting to relatively safe borrowers with observable risk below the median. Column (5) estimates the specification in column (2) except restricting to relatively risky borrowers 
with observable risk above the median. Column (6) estimates the specification in column (2) except interacting all the regressors with a dummy variable Risky indicating borrowers 
with observable risk above the median. Column (7) estimates the specification in column (2) except using the interest rate (without subtracting out the g-fee) as the dependent 
variable. T-statistics computed using robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% 
level, and *** indicates significance at the 1% level. Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac), 2016–2017, restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, 
purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans exceeding the base conforming loan limit, 
loans with subordinate financing, loans with a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from the first table of the g-fee matrix by more than 
25 basis points.

836,175
0.226
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Full

and Hispanic borrowers; appraisal value decile indicators; an indicator 
for a refinance loan; an indicator for self-employed borrowers; and an 
indicator for first-time homebuyers.

Column (4) shows that the association between interest rates net 
of  g-fees  and  defaults  is  weaker  for  relatively  safe  borrowers  with 
observable risk below the median, while column (5) shows that the 
association is stronger for riskier borrowers with observable risk above 
the median. Column (6) shows that the difference between relatively 
safe and risky borrowers is statistically significant. Finally, column (7) 
shows that the result is similar when using the interest rate without 
subtracting out the g-fee.

These results suggest that lenders implement additional screening 
compared to the determinants of the upfront g-fee. Section 4 incor-
porates this result into a model of mortgage lender competition by 
supposing  that  lenders  can  invest  in  improving  their  underwriting 
practices, which allows them to observe a partially informative signal 
of the borrower’s default risk conditional on observable risk.

Note that our finding in Table  4 is similar to previous results in 
the literature showing a positive association between the spread-at-
origination (SATO) and default (Gerardi et al., 2023, Fuster and Willen, 
2017). However, we additionally present several pieces of evidence 
in  robustness  tests  below  to  show  that  this  positive  association  is 
not driven by factors such as reverse causation, prepayment risk, or 
discount points and lender credits. These findings support the idea that 
the positive association is most likely explained by borrowers’ risk-
related characteristics beyond observable risk. These additional pieces 
evidence are especially important for interpreting this positive associ-
ation as a sign of lenders having better information about borrowers’ 
repayment ability.

To show the robustness of our results, Figure C.7 and Table C.8 in 
Internet Appendix C.2 show that default is also positively associated 

with origination revenue in 2018.23 Also, Table C.9 shows that the 
association between interest rates and default is robust to controlling 
for observable prepayment risk, and Table C.10 shows that it is robust 
to controlling for discount points less lender credits as a percentage of 
the loan amount. Table C.11 shows that the results are robust to using 
fixed effects for the originator rather than the seller, and Table C.12 
show they are generally robust to restricting to nonbanks.

Robustness  to  direct  effect  of  interest  rates  on  default.  An  alternative 
interpretation for the association between interest rates net of g-fees 
and observable risk is that higher interest rates might directly (causally) 
increase default risk. To estimate this direct effect, we examine varia-
tion in interest rates that is independent of pricing for default risk. We 
implement three approaches for doing this that are based on changes 
in interest rates induced by variation in the upfront g-fee or prices in 
the to-be-announced (TBA) market. We take advantage of the fact that 
the direct impact of monthly payments on defaults does not depend 
on whether the change in interest rates comes from variation in g-fees, 
TBA prices, or lender markups.

Our first approach to examine the direct effect of interest rates on 
default leverages discontinuities in the upfront g-fee as a function of 
the credit score. In particular, we focus on discontinuities where the 
upfront g-fee changes by at least 50 basis points (as a percentage of the 
loan amount). We implement a regression discontinuity approach by 
restricting to loans near these shifts and examining how interest rates 
and defaults change exactly at the shifts.

In more detail, as mentioned in Section 2.1, a component of the up-
front g-fee varies based on a grid defined by ranges for the credit score 
and LTV ratio. For loans in our sample period with an LTV between 

23 Note that for loans originated in 2018 we only consider defaults within 
one year of origination to avoid unusual activity associated with the COVID-19 
pandemic and the associated ease of forbearance.

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Fig. 4.  Application denials and observable risk.
This figure presents a binned scatterplot of the denial rate for mortgages accepted 
by the GSEs’ automated underwriting systems on observable risk. Observable risk is 
the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, loan-to-value ratio, and 
debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1. Observable risk is estimated using the 
MLIS data.
Source: confidential HMDA, 2018, restricting to approved or denied applications ac-
cepted by the GSE automated underwriting systems for conventional, 30-year, purchase 
or no cash-out refinance, first lien loan applications for one-unit, owner-occupied, 
single-family non-manufactured houses and excluding high balance loans exceeding the 
base conforming loan limit and loans with a combined loan-to-value ratio exceeding 
80%. We also exclude denials due to incomplete applications and insufficient cash at 
closing.

60% and 80%, the upfront g-fee matrix exhibits a discrete decline of 
at least 50 basis points as the credit score surpasses the credit score 
thresholds in the following seven cases: 660 for LTV ratios between 
70.01% and 75%, 680 for LTV ratios between 60.01% and 70%, 680 
for LTV ratios between 70.01% and 75%, 680 for LTV ratios between 
75.01% and 80%, 700 conditional on LTV between 75.01% and 80%, 
720 conditional on LTV between 70.01% and 75%, 720 conditional on 
LTV between 75.01% and 80%. To focus on only changes in interest 
rates at these thresholds and minimize the possibility that they could 
also affect acceptance decisions, we restrict to loans with a DTI of 
up to 43%. This restriction is based on the observation that 45% is 
the lowest DTI ratio that appears to affect acceptance decisions for 
GSE loans (Bosshardt et al., 2024). We also restrict to loans where 
the total upfront g-fee is exactly equal to the component determined 
by LTV and credit score. On this subsample, we regress the interest 
rate on an indicator for having a credit score greater than or equal to 
the respective threshold times the change in the upfront g-fee at the 
threshold. We control for threshold group (i.e., an indicator for loans 
within a 5-point range of a given threshold) by year-month fixed effects 
and credit score (minus the respective threshold) times the threshold 
group indicators.

Fig.  5(a) combines loans from all seven cases and shows that interest 
rates  exhibit  a  discrete  reduction  as  the  credit  score  surpasses  the 
respective threshold. Column (1) of Table  5 shows that a 100 basis point 
increase in the upfront g-fee at the thresholds is associated with a 17.5 
basis point and statistically significant increase in the interest rate. By 
contrast, Fig.  5(b) indicates no discontinuous changes in default rates 
at the threshold. Column (2) indicates a statistically insignificant asso-
ciation between the upfront g-fee and defaults. Column (3) similarly 
indicates an insignificant relationship between defaults and interest 
rates when instrumenting the latter by the change in the upfront g-
fee at the thresholds. Table C.13 in Internet Appendix C.2 additionally 
shows how interest rates and defaults vary at the thresholds for each 
of the seven cases separately. Interest rates decrease in a narrow range 
of  about  7  to  9  basis  points  for  thresholds  with  a  0.5  basis  point 
decline in the upfront g-fee, or by 17 to 18 basis points for thresholds 

Fig. 5.  Interest rates and defaults at the g-fee thresholds.
These figures restrict to loans with a loan-to-value (LTV) ratio and credit score such that 
the credit score is within 10 points of a threshold where the upfront g-fee changes by at 
least 50 basis points. Fig.  5(a) shows a binned scatterplot of the interest rate on credit 
score (minus the respective threshold) while controlling for threshold by year-month 
fixed effects. Fig.  5(b) is similar except that the 𝑦-axis corresponds to the default rate.
Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac),2016–2017, 
restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-
unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans 
exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate financing, loans with 
a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, loans with debt-to-income ratio up to 43%, and 
loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from the first table of the g-fee matrix.

with  a  1  basis  point  decline  in  the  upfront  g-fee.  There  is  greater 
variability in the estimated associations between the thresholds and 
defaults, which could be partially due to the low rate of defaults in 
the sample. However, all the estimates are statistically insignificant and 
roughly evenly split around zero.

In the second approach, we instrument the interest rate with prices 
in the to-be-announced (TBA) market. The TBA market is a forward 
market for MBS in which the exact pools are not specified by the seller 
until shortly before settlement. The TBA market is often used by lenders 
to fix the sale price of a loan at the time of a rate lock but before the 
loan is originated. The TBA price varies with the MBS coupon rate. 
A positive shift in TBA prices allows lenders to charge lower interest 
rates to achieve the same revenue. Column (1) of Table  5 shows that an 
increase in the TBA price for a given coupon generally passes through 

11 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Table 5
G-fee and TBA induced variation in interest rates and default.

  IR

  Above threshold × upfront g-fee

  TBA price

(1)
IR
(First stage)

(2)
Default
(Red. form)

0.175***
(22.91)

−0.151
(−0.52)

(3)
Default
(IV)

−0.864
(−0.52)

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

(4)
IR
(First stage)

(5)
Default
(Red. form)

(6)
Default
(IV)

−0.125
(−0.54)

−0.110***
(−137.93)

0.014
(0.54)

38,292
0.007
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

38,292
0.532
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

38,292
−0.002
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

130,787
0.718
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

  Observations
  𝑅2
  Threshold ×Year-month FE
  Threshold dummy ×Credit score
  ZIP ×Year-quarter FE
  Seller ×Year-quarter FE
  Controls
Note: Columns (1) through (3) restrict to loans with a loan-to-value (LTV) ratio and credit score such that the credit score is within 5 points of a threshold where the upfront 
g-fee changes by at least 50 basis points. Column (1) regresses the interest rate on an indicator for having a credit score greater than or equal to the respective threshold times the 
change in the upfront g-fee at the threshold, and it controls for threshold group (i.e., an indicator for loans within a 5-point range of a given threshold) by year-month fixed effects 
and credit score (minus the respective threshold) times the threshold group indicators. Column (2) is similar to column (1) except that the dependent variable is an indicator for 
default (multiplied by 100). Column (3) is similar to column (2) except that we regress the default indicator on interest rates, which we instrument by the change in the upfront 
g-fee at the respective threshold. Column (4) regresses the interest rate on the to-be-announced (TBA) market price for a 3.5% coupon as of the lock date while controlling for ZIP 
code by year-quarter fixed effects and seller by year-quarter fixed effects. Observable risk is the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, loan-to-value ratio, and 
debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1. We also include the following controls: loan amount decile indicators and an indicator for full income and asset documentation. 
Column (5) regresses an indicator for default (multiplied by 100) on the TBA price. Column (6) regresses the default indicator on the interest rate, which we instrument by the 
TBA price. T-statistics computed using robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% 
level, and *** indicates significance at the 1% level. Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac), 2016–2017, restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, 
purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans exceeding the base conforming loan limit, 
loans with subordinate financing, loans with a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from the first table of the g-fee matrix. Columns (1) 
through (3) additionally restrict to loans with a DTI up to 43%. Columns (4) through (6) restrict MLIS merged with Optimal Blue. TBA price data comes from Bloomberg.

130,787
0.289
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

130,787
−0.000
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

to lower interest rates.24 We can then instrument the effect of higher 
interest rates on defaults based on changes in TBA prices. Column (2) 
shows in a reduced form regression that defaults are not significantly 
associated with changes in TBA prices, and column (3) shows that they 
are also not significantly associated with the instrumented variation in 
interest rates.

Our two approaches for estimating the effect of interest rates on 
defaults, namely the regression discontinuity in columns 1-3 of Table  5 
and the TBA price instrument in columns 4–6 of Table  5, are comple-
mentary due to their different strengths and weaknesses. The regression 
discontinuity uses micro-level variation, but it restricts to a relatively 
small sample near the thresholds and has lower power. The TBA price 
instrument explains a large share of the variation in interest rates but 
it depends on macro-level variation, which could confound the results 
if, for example, TBA prices are associated with certain macroeconomic 
conditions.

In the third approach, we instrument interest rates using the upfront 
g-fee while linearly controlling for observable risk. The g-fee generally 
increases with the LTV ratio and decreases with the credit score, but 
there is still variation after controlling for observable risk, which may 
be due to a combination of cross-subsidization across borrowers with 
different  risk  characteristics  as  well  as  variation  in  observable  risk 
associated with the DTI ratio. The exogeneity assumption is that, when 
controlling for observable risk, the correlation between the upfront 
g-fee and the default rate is only due to the former’s effect on the 
interest rate. In particular, this means that the variation in the upfront 
g-fee while controlling for observable risk is not correlated with any 
unobservable risk. A potential concern is that borrowers that are willing 
to accept higher rates attributable to the upfront g-fee might be riskier. 
For example, borrowers near the thresholds in the upfront g-fee matrix 
that do not make adjustments of their LTV ratio to reduce the g-fee 
may be less financially sophisticated. However, this selection effect 
would tend to bias our estimates towards a more positive association 
between default rates and interest rates, which is the opposite direction 

as our conclusion. Note that the third approach is similar to the first 
approach in that it uses variation in interest rates due to the upfront 
g-fee. A benefit of the third approach relative to the first is that it uses 
a larger sample, but a cost is that compares borrowers with less similar 
observable characteristics.

Column (1) of Table C.14 shows in a first-stage regression that a 
100 basis point increase in up-front g-fee is associated with 16.3 basis 
point increase in monthly mortgage payments. As shown in Figure C.8 
in Internet Appendix C.2, residual variation in the interest rate spans 
about 25 basis points in the interest rate. Column (2) of Table C.14 then 
indicates a small and statistically insignificant relationship between 
the residual variation in the upfront g-fee and defaults. Column (3) 
similarly  indicates  a  negligible  relationship  between  interest  rates, 
instrumented by the upfront g-fee, and defaults.

Note that our setting contrasts in several ways from existing studies 
that find a larger effect of interest rates on default (Fuster and Willen, 
2017, Di Maggio et al., 2017, and Gupta, 2019). For one, we focus on 
interest rates determined at origination, whereas the studies from the 
literature focus on variation due to interest rate resets for adjustable-
rate mortgages. Interest rate resets plausibly have a stronger effect since 
household income could have changed significantly from the time of 
mortgage origination, resulting in some households having significantly 
higher monthly mortgage payments relative to income. Additionally, 
households could be inattentive and unprepared for the effect of a 
reset (Gupta, 2019). Moreover, we focus on a relatively safe sample 
of post-crisis GSE loans, whereas the primary sample in each of these 
papers  focuses  on  much  riskier  non-agency  loans  originated  in  the 
volatile 2000s decade. The level of baseline risk is another factor that 
plausibly affects the impact of interest rates. For example, Fuster and 
Willen (2017) and Di Maggio et al. (2017) show that the effect of ex-
post interest rate changes on defaults increases with risk characteristics 
such as high LTV ratios and low credit scores.

3.3. Denials and observable risk

24 We use the Bloomberg series ‘‘FNCL X G0 Mtge’’ for coupons X.

For this observation, we use the confidential HMDA data in 2018 
to  examine  the  extent  to  which  lenders  deny  applications  that  are 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

accepted by the GSEs’ automated underwriting systems (AUSs). Analo-
gous to the MLIS sample, we restrict to applications for conventional, 
30-year, purchase or no cash-out refinance, first lien loans for one-
unit, owner-occupied, single-family non-manufactured houses. We also 
exclude  applications  for  high  balance  loans  exceeding  the  national 
baseline  conforming  loan  limit  and  applications  with  an  LTV  ratio 
exceeding 80%. We further restrict to mortgages that are processed 
by exactly one AUS, which is either Desktop Underwriter (for Fannie 
Mae) or Loan Prospector (for Freddie Mac), and for which the result 
of the AUS is ‘‘Approve/Eligible’’ or ‘‘Accept.’’25 To focus on denials 
that are relatively likely to reflect screening by lenders rather than 
problems pertaining to the application process, we exclude denials due 
to incomplete applications and insufficient cash at closing.26 Note that 
we compute observable risk as a function of credit score, LTV, and DTI 
based on the model estimated with the MLIS data.27

Fig.  4 shows that denials increase with observable risk, ranging from 
about 1.60% for borrowers with 0.08% observable risk to 5.69% for 
borrowers with 1.82% observable risk. As a robustness check, Figure 
C.9 in Internet Appendix C.3 shows that a clear positive association 
remains if we remove denials due to any of the other reasons. Note 
that these results are similar to Bhutta et al. (2025), who also show 
that lender accept/reject decisions do not fully coincide with the GSEs’ 
AUSs. However, they focus on racial and ethnic disparities of lender 
and AUS denials and show how they vary across credit scores, whereas 
our focus is on the relationship between lender denials of AUS-accepted 
applications and observable risk.

3.4. Interpretation

The correlations between interest rates and both observable and 
unobservable risk suggest that lenders charge a risk spread on GSE 
mortgages that is independent of the g-fee and that predicts default, 
consistent with an intensive margin of overlays. We also show that 
lenders deny riskier applications, even if they are accepted by the GSEs, 
consistent with an extensive margin of overlays. Section 4 rationalizes 
these results with a model in which lenders have a positive loss given 
default as well as a more precise screening technology compared to 
what is reflected in the g-fee.

4. Model

This section develops and estimates a model of mortgage lender 
competition that matches the evidence from Section 3 of lenders pricing 
for default risk and conducting screening independently of the GSEs.

4.1. Overview

There are two types of agents: a mass of consumers denoted by 
𝑖  and  𝑛  lenders  denoted  by  𝑗.  There  are  two  periods.  In  the  first 
period, consumers choose whether to take out a mortgage and, if so, 
which lender to borrow from. To focus on the discretionary behavior 
of lenders as distinct from the underwriting processes of the GSEs, we 
specifically consider loans that satisfy the GSEs’ underwriting criteria. 

25 Note that about 92.6% of the sample is processed by only one AUS. 
The results are similar if we restrict to mortgages that receive a response 
of ‘‘Approve/Eligible’’ or ‘‘Accept’’ by either Desktop Underwriter (for Fannie 
Mae) or Loan Prospector (Freddie Mac) for at least one AUS submission.
26 In particular, we exclude applications for which any of potentially multi-
ple reasons for denial refers to an incomplete application or insufficient cash 
at closing. Note that 89% of denied applications in our sample only have one 
denial reason. See Table C.15 in Internet Appendix C.3 for the fraction of 
denials attributable to each reason.
27 Note that we use the combined LTV (which reflects all debts secured 
by  the  property)  since  the  HMDA  data  does  not  have  the  original  LTV 
(corresponding to the individual loan application).

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Lenders also screen consumers and make interest rate offers. Again, to 
focus on the decisions of lenders as distinct from the GSEs, we assume 
that the interest rate is net of g-fees. The second period is a resolution 
in which the consumer receives the outside option payoff of zero if it 
did not obtain funding, otherwise, it either repays the loan or defaults.

4.2. Consumer problem

A consumer can either buy a house requiring 1 unit of external 
capital or take an outside option whose value is normalized to zero. 
If consumer 𝑖 takes out a mortgage from lender 𝑗 to buy a house, then 
the utility is given by 

𝑢𝑖𝑗 = 𝜇𝑖 − 𝛼𝑖𝑟𝑗 + 𝜖𝑖𝑗 ,

(4)

where 𝜇𝑖 is the value of owning a house, 𝛼𝑖 is the sensitivity to the 
interest rate for consumer 𝑖, 𝑟𝑗 is the interest rate offered by lender 𝑗, 
and 𝜖𝑖𝑗 is an unobserved idiosyncratic factor that represents the quality 
of the match between consumer 𝑖 and lender 𝑗. For example, a higher 
𝜖𝑖𝑗 could represent lender 𝑗 having a branch location near consumer 𝑖
and therefore being more convenient. We assume that the 𝜖𝑖𝑗 shocks 
are independently distributed and drawn from a Type I Extreme Value 
distribution with cumulative distribution function 𝐹 (𝜖𝑖𝑗 ) = 𝑒−𝑒−𝜖𝑖𝑗 .

Consumers choose between the lenders and the outside option to 
maximize their utility. Utility maximization determines the probability 
of obtaining a loan from each lender as follows:28

𝑠𝑗 =

exp(𝜇𝑖 − 𝛼𝑖𝑟𝑗 )
𝑗=1 exp(𝜇𝑖 − 𝛼𝑖𝑟𝑗 )

1 + ∑𝑛

.

(5)

Note  that  the  probability  of  taking  the  outside  option  is  given  by 
1 − ∑𝑛

1

.

𝑗=1 𝑠𝑗 =

1+∑𝑛

𝑗=1 exp(𝜇𝑖−𝛼𝑖𝑟𝑗 )

4.3. Lender problem

Screening.  There are two unobserved quality types of consumers: a 
mass 1 of type 𝑟 consumers that repay and a mass 𝑞 of type 𝑑 consumers 
that default. Lenders screen consumers by drawing a signal 𝑧𝑖 that 
indicates ‘‘low’’ (L), ‘‘medium’’ (M), or ‘‘high’’ (H) risk. For simplicity, 
we assume that a given consumer produces the same signal for all 
lenders.29 The informativeness of the signal is determined by a lender’s 
information level 𝜓𝑗 . In particular, conditional on 𝜓𝑗 , the distributions 
of the signals generated by the two types of consumers are given by 

𝑃 (𝑧𝑖|𝑑; 𝜓𝑗 ) =

𝑃 (𝑧𝑖|𝑟; 𝜓𝑗 ) =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

with probability 𝜖(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )
𝐿,
𝑀, with probability 1 − 𝜓𝑗 − 𝜖(1 − 𝜙)(1 − 𝜓)
with probability 𝜓𝑗 − 𝜖𝜙(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )
𝐻,

with probability 𝜓𝑗 − 𝜖𝜙(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )
𝐿,
𝑀, with probability 1 − 𝜓𝑗 − 𝜖(1 − 𝜙)(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )
with probability 𝜖(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )
𝐻,

,

(6)

.

(7)

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

The exogenous parameter 𝜖 represents the tendency for repaying con-
sumers to generate 𝐻 signals and defaulting borrowers to generate 𝐿
signals. The parameter 𝜙 represents the extent to which the mass for 
these signals comes from the 𝑀 signal or the remaining signal (𝐿 for 
repaying consumers and 𝐻 for defaulting consumers). Note that the de-
fault rate associated with each type of signal is 𝛿𝐿 =
, 
𝛿𝑀 = 𝑞
1+𝑞

𝑞𝜖(1−𝜓𝑗 )
𝑞𝜖(1−𝜓𝑗 )+𝜓𝑗 −𝜖𝜙(1−𝜓𝑗 )

𝑞(𝜓𝑗 −𝜖𝜙(1−𝜓𝑗 ))
𝑞(𝜓𝑗 −𝜖𝜙(1−𝜓𝑗 ))+𝜖(1−𝜓𝑗 )
Each lender chooses 𝜓𝑗 at a cost of 

, and 𝛿𝐻 =

.

𝑐(𝜓𝑗 ) =

𝑘
(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )2

− 𝑘,

(8)

28 See Train (2009) for a proof.
29 Our results are robust to an alternative model in which lenders draw 
different signals (see Internet Appendix F).

13 

J. Bosshardt et al.

where 𝑘 is the scale of the information cost. Note that the cost is zero 
when 𝜓𝑗 is equal to zero, which corresponds to an uninformative signal, 
and the cost approaches infinity as 𝜓𝑗 approaches 1, which corresponds 
to a perfectly informative signal. The information level represents the 
extent to which lenders improve their risk assessment models or invest 
labor hours in careful loan processing.

Profit maximization.  For simplicity, we assume that a consumer’s inter-
est rate sensitivity is observable to lenders. Therefore, we can focus on 
the lender’s problem for a set of consumers with a given interest rate 
sensitivity 𝛼. Suppose that a lender’s cost of funding is equal to 𝜌. If 
the loan defaults, then the lender incurs an expected loss given default 
of 𝜔 ≥ 0 due to, for example, repurchase risk (Fuster et al., 2024). If a 
lender were to lend to consumers associated with each type of signal, 
then the lender’s expected profits can be expressed as
(𝑟𝐿
)
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝐿) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝐿)
𝛱𝑗 = (𝜓𝑗 − 𝜖𝜙(1 − 𝜓𝑗 ) + 𝑞𝜖(1 − 𝜓𝑗 ))𝑠𝐿
𝑗
(𝑟𝑀
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑀 ) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑀 )
+ (1 − 𝜓𝑗 )(1 + 𝑞)(1 − 𝜖(1 − 𝜙))𝑠𝑀
𝑗
(𝑟𝐻
+ (𝑞(𝜓𝑗 − 𝜖𝜙(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )) + 𝜖(1 − 𝜓𝑗 ))𝑠𝐻
𝑗

)
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝐻 ) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝐻 )

)

− 𝑐(𝜓𝑗 ),

(9)

where for each signal 𝑧 the term 𝑟𝑧
𝑗 (1−𝛿𝑧) is the expected revenues from 
lending to consumers with that signal and −(𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝐿) is the expected 
costs. The resulting profit is multiplied by the fraction of consumers 
that apply for a loan 𝑠𝑧 and the mass of such signals in the borrower 
pool.

A lender has an incentive to lend to borrowers with a given signal 𝑧
as long as it can charge an interest rate at least equal to the level which 
generates zero profits, which is 𝜌+𝜔𝛿𝑧
1−𝛿𝑧 . However, there exists a bound 𝐵
on the interest rate a lender can charge. For example, 𝐵 could represent 
regulations that make it difficult for lenders to charge high interest 
rates, such as the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), 
which burdens lenders with additional disclosures, prohibitions, and 
counseling requirements when originating a loan with high interest 
rates or fees. Motivated by the evidence in Fig.  4 that lenders reject 
some borrowers, we assume 𝐵 < 𝜌+𝜔𝛿𝐻
1−𝛿𝐻 , which implies no lending to 
𝐻-signal consumers. However, we assume 𝐵 is high enough that it does 
not constrain lending to 𝑀-signal borrowers.

Each lender chooses the interest rate for each signal type 𝑟𝑧
𝑗  and 
information level 𝜓𝑗 to maximize expected profits.30 The first order 
conditions for 𝑟𝑧
𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧
1 − 𝛿𝑧 +

𝑗  and 𝜓𝑗 yield, respectively,31

𝑟𝑧
𝑗 =

(10)

− (1 + 𝑞)(1 − 𝜖(1 − 𝜙))𝑠𝑀
𝑗

(11)

,

1
𝛼(1 − 𝑠𝑧
𝑗 )
𝑗 − 𝜌)
(𝑟𝐿

𝑐′(𝜓𝑗 ) = (1 + 𝜖𝜙 − 𝑞𝜖)𝑠𝐿
𝑗
(𝑟𝑀

×

).
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑀 ) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑀 )
𝜌+𝜔𝛿𝑧
𝑗
1−𝛿𝑧
𝑗

In Eq.  (10), the term 

 represents a lender’s zero-profits interest 

1
rate, which we call the origination cost. The remaining term 
𝛼(1−𝑠𝑧
𝑗 )
represents the markup. In Eq.  (11), the left-hand side represents the 
marginal cost of increasing the information level, whereas the right-
hand side corresponds to the marginal benefit derived from having a 
greater share of the portfolio consisting of 𝐿-signal consumers. Lending 
to 𝐿-signal consumers is preferable since lenders charge them lower 
interest rates, which causes fewer of them to substitute to the outside 
option.32

30 Our results are qualitatively robust to an alternative model in which 
lenders strategically bid the interest rates (see Internet Appendix F).
31 See Appendix  A for a proof.
32 To see this, we can substitute Eq. (10) into Eq. (11), whereby the latter 
becomes 𝑐′(𝜓𝑗 ) =
. The right-hand side therefore has the same 
sign as 𝑠𝐿
, which is nonnegative since L-signal consumers have lower 
𝑗 − 𝑠𝑀
interest rates for a given market share by Eq.  (10) and the market shares are 
decreasing in the interest rate by Eq.  (5).

𝑠𝑀
𝑗
𝛼(1−𝑠𝑀
𝑗 )

𝑠𝐿
𝑗
𝛼(1−𝑠𝐿
𝑗 )

−

𝑗

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Since the solution is symmetric across lenders, we henceforth drop 
the 𝑗 subscripts. Note that a few key properties of the model are as 
follows:

1. The denial rate is equal to the fraction of 𝐻-signal consumers: 

𝜖(1−𝜓)+𝑞(𝜓−𝜖𝜙(1−𝜓))
1+𝑞

.

2. The default rate is equal to the fraction of defaulting consumers 
among consumers that receive a loan. This can be expressed as a 
weighted average 𝑑 = ∑
𝑧 𝑃 𝑧𝑑𝑧, where the weights correspond to 
the fraction of consumers with a given signal among those that 
are offered a loan, i.e.,

𝑃 𝐿 =

𝑃 𝑀 =

𝜓 − 𝜖𝜙(1 − 𝜓) + 𝑞𝜖(1 − 𝜓)
𝜓 − 𝜖𝜙(1 − 𝜓) + 𝑞𝜖(1 − 𝜓) + (1 + 𝑞)((1 − 𝜓) − 𝜖(1 − 𝜙)(1 − 𝜓))
(1 + 𝑞)((1 − 𝜓) − 𝜖(1 − 𝜙)(1 − 𝜓))
𝜓 − 𝜖𝜙(1 − 𝜓) + 𝑞𝜖(1 − 𝜓) + (1 + 𝑞)((1 − 𝜓) − 𝜖(1 − 𝜙)(1 − 𝜓))

(12)

(13)

3. The signal-weighted average interest rate is 𝑟 = ∑

𝑧 𝑃 𝑧𝑟𝑧. Note that 
references to the interest rate in the model refer specifically 
to  the  signal-weighted  average  interest  rate  unless  otherwise 
specified.

4.4. Model estimation

We find the parameters to quantitatively match the observations in 
Section 3 using GMM, the generalized method of moments (Hansen, 
1982, Hansen, 2022). We focus on how the model outcomes vary with 
the fraction of defaulting consumers 𝜆𝑑 , which is also equal to  𝑞
. 
1+𝑞
We therefore normalize the cost of funding 𝜌 to be zero, as it only 
serves to create a level shift of interest rates that can be used to capture 
time-varying factors that are not the focus of this exercise. We select 
𝜙 = 1
2  and show in Appendix D.4 that 𝜙 does not have a material effect 
on the results. We assume that the interest rate sensitivity for a given 
level of observable risk is uniformly distributed with probability density 
function 𝑈 [𝛼(𝜆𝑑 ) − 𝜎, 𝛼(𝜆𝑑 ) + 𝜎], where the mean 𝛼(𝜆𝑑 ) linearly varies 
with 𝜆𝑑 according to 𝛼(𝜆𝑑 ) = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝜆𝑑 . We estimate the mean value of 
owning a home, which we denote as 𝜇.

The number of lenders 𝑛 is directly selected to be 2, which is the 
median number of lenders that are seriously considered by borrowers 
according  to  the  National  Survey  of  Mortgage  Originations  (Bhutta 
et al., 2021, Alexandrov and Koulayev, 2018).33

The remaining 7 parameters (𝜇, 𝛼0, 𝛼1, 𝜎, 𝜔, 𝑘, and 𝜖) are selected 

to match 8 moments based on the observations reported in Section 3.
Moments related to the correlation between interest rates and ob-

servable risk:

1. The  variation  of  interest  rates  net  of  g-fees  with  respect  to 
observable risk. Based on column (5) of Fig.  1, we find that an 
increase in observable risk by 1 percentage point is on average 
associated with a .042 percentage point increase in interest rates 
net of g-fees. We determine the model analog by computing 
the slope of the signal-weighted interest rate with respect to 
observable risk locally and then taking a weighted average over 
observable risk based on the empirical distribution.

2. The level of the interest rate net of g-fees for consumers with 
the lowest level of observable risk after subtracting the time-
varying portion of interest rates. Based on Fig.  2, this is equal 
to .23 percentage points.

3. The variation of the 10th percentile of interest rates net of g-fees 
with respect to observable risk. We determine this empirically by 
estimating a quantile regression of the spread of the interest rate 
net of g-fees relative to the best available rates on observable 
risk and partialling out by the same fixed effects and controls 

33 Note that, in our sample from the National Survey of Mortgage Origi-
nations, we find that 54.2% of respondents report seriously considering or 
applying to at least two lenders.

14 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Value

Table 6
Estimated parameters.
  Parameter
  Borrower utility of borrowing (𝜇)
  Level of sensitivity to interest rate (𝛼0)
  Variation in sensitivity to interest rate (𝛼1)
  Sensitivity to interest rate dispersion (𝜎)
  Lender loss given default (𝜔)
  Information cost scale (𝑘)
  Signal distribution (𝜖)
Note: Parameters related to the interest rate sensitivity (𝛼0, 𝛼1, and 𝜎) are scaled such that the interest rate sensitivity corresponds to the 
decrease in utility associated with a 1 percentage point increase in the interest rate. The lender loss given default 𝜔 is scaled as a percentage of 
the loaned amount. The information cost scale 𝑘 is scaled in a manner consistent with lender profits in Eq.  (9) being expressed as a percentage 
of the loaned amount.

Standard error 
(2.680)
(.422)
(.153)
(.331)
(.329)
(2.638e−04)  
(.198)

5.177
8.342
−46.682
6.627
2.709
8.941e−05
.0349

Table 7
Empirical and model generated moments.
  Variable
  Slope of interest rate wrt. obs. risk
  Interest rate for borrowers with low obs. risk
  Slope of 10th pctile. interest rate wrt. obs. risk
  Difference between 90th pctile. and 10th pctile. for low obs. risk
  Slope of default wrt. interest rate (safe)
  Slope of default wrt. interest rate (risky)
  Slope of denial rate to obs. risk
  Denial rate for borrowers with low obs. risk
Note: All rates are expressed as fractions. For example, 1 percentage point is expressed as .01. ‘‘Interest rate’’ in the variable description refers 
to interest rate net of g-fees.

Model (base) 
0.0686
0.0024
0.0318
0.0052
0.0899
0.6686
1.6432
0.0134

0.0419
0.0023
0.0140
0.0049
0.1120
0.6499
1.9199
0.0160

Empirical

as in column (5) of Table  1, which is similar to the slope of the 
10th percentile interest rate in Fig.  2. We find that an increase 
in observable risk by 1 percentage point is on average associated 
with a .014 percentage point increase in the 10th percentile.
4. The difference between the 90th percentile and 10th percentile 
of interest rates net of g-fees for consumers with the lowest level 
of observable risk. Based on Fig.  2, we find that this is equal to 
.49 percentage points.

Moments related to the correlation between interest rates and un-

observable risk:

5 & 6. The  variation  of  default  rates  with  respect  to  interest  rates 
while controlling for observable risk. There are two associated 
moments: one conditions on safe borrowers with observable risk 
below the median and the other conditions on risky borrowers 
with observable risk above the median. Based on Table  4, this 
correlation is equal to 11 basis points for safe borrowers and 
65 basis points for risky borrowers. We determine the model 
analog by first computing the regression coefficient of default on 
the interest rate for each level of observable risk. Note that the 
distribution of interest rates and default rates for a given level of 
observable risk is determined by the variation in the interest rate 
sensitivity 𝛼 and the signal 𝑧. We sample three values of 𝛼 (the 
10th percentile, 50th percentile, and 90th percentile) and, for 
each, weight by the endogenous frequencies of the signals. We 
then take a weighted average of this quotient over observable 
risk either below or above the median based on the empirical 
distribution.

Moment related to the correlation between denials and observable 

risk:

7. The variation in the denial rate with respect to observable risk. 
We determine this empirically by regressing an indicator for 
denial on observable risk. We find that an increase in observable 
risk by 1 percentage point is on average associated with a 1.92 
percentage point increase in denials.

8. The level of the denial rate for consumers with the lowest level 
of observable risk. Based on Fig.  4, this is equal to 1.6 percent.

Table  6 presents the selected parameters, while Table  7 compares 
the empirical and model-generated values of the matched characteris-
tics.

Table  8 shows the sensitivity of each of the moments to each of 
the parameters relative to the estimated parameters. For each moment 
there is at least one parameter such that a 10% change in the parameter 
induces at least a 9% change in the moment. This observation indicates 
that the moments respond to the parameters and supports the identifi-
cation of the model. While the moments simultaneously determine all 
the parameters, some intuitive links are as follows. The variation of 
interest rates net of g-fees with respect to observable risk (moment 1) 
is significantly influenced by the loss given default 𝜔, which contributes 
to origination costs, and the variation in the sensitivity to the interest 
rate 𝛼1, which contributes to markups.34 The level of the interest rate 
for consumers with the lowest level of observable risk (moment 2) 
relates most to the average sensitivity to the interest rate for these 
consumers, 𝛼0. The variation of the 10th percentile of interest rates net 
of g-fees (moment 3) is strongly influenced 𝜔. The difference between 
the 90th percentile and 10th percentile of interest rates (moment 4) 
is strongly influenced by the dispersion in the sensitivity of interest 
rates conditional on observable risk, 𝜎.35 The slope of the denial rate 
(moment 7) relates most to the information cost 𝑘. It is also one of 
the moments most strongly affected by the consumer’s value of the 
transaction relative to the outside option 𝜇, which is related to the 
fact that the benefit of acquiring information derives from the lower 
tendency for 𝐿-signal consumers to substitute to the outside option. 
The level of the denial rate for low risk borrowers (moment 8) is the 
moment that is most strongly affected by 𝜖.

4.5. Alternative estimation based on incomplete pass-through

One  potential  drawback  of  our  estimation  approach  is  that  the 
parameters for the interest rate sensitivity 𝛼, which determines lender 

34 It is also strongly influenced by the interest rate sensitivity for low-risk 
borrowers 𝛼0, since the rate of change in the markup term in Eq.  (10) decreases 
with 𝛼.
35 It is also strongly influenced by 𝛼0 since the rate of change in the markup 
term in Eq.  (10) decreases with 𝛼.

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

Table 8
Sensitivity analysis.
  (a) Levels

  IR slope: avg
  IR level: avg
  IR slope: p10
  IR level: p90-p10
  Corr. IR and default (safe)
  Corr. IR and default (risky)
  Denial slope
  Denial level (low risk)

  (b) Relative changes

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Base

.0686
.0024
.0318
.0052
.0899
.6686
1.6432
.0134

𝜇

.0677
.0024
.0324
.0052
.0893
.6528
1.6072
.0134

𝛼0

.0602
.0022
.0311
.0038
−.2896
.9855
1.569
.0138

𝛼1

.08
.0024
.0326
.0052
.0897
.6879
1.8708
.0134

𝜎

.0686
.0024
.0316
.0058
.0835
.5884
1.6432
.0134

𝜔

.0737
.0024
.036
.0052
.0904
.687
1.6683
.0134

𝑘

.0697
.0024
.0321
.0052
−.0681
.6559
1.4992
.0151

𝜖
.0689  
.0024  
.0318  
.0052  
.0903  
.671  
1.6654 
.0138  

𝜇

𝛼1

𝛼0

𝜖
.0045  
  IR slope: avg
.1658
−.0001 
  IR level: avg
.0009
.0001  
  IR slope: p10
.0262
−.0001 
  IR level: p90-p10
.0032
.0048  
  Corr. IR and default (safe)
−.0023
.0037  
  Corr. IR and default (risky)
.0289
.0135  
  Denial: slope
.1385
  Denial level (low risk)
.0266  
−.0002
Note: Table  8a shows the values of the observables at the estimated parameters in the ‘‘Base’’ column, and for the columns labeled by a parameter it shows the values of the 
moments when that parameter increases by 10% while the remaining parameters are kept at the estimated level. Table  8b shows the corresponding change in the observable 
relative to its level at the estimated parameters.

−.1227
−.0909
−.0205
−.2739
−4.2208
.474
−.0452
.0264

−.0135
.0076
.0179
.0076
−.0068
−.0235
−.0219
.0005

.0163
.0011
.0092
−.0039
−1.757
−.019
−.0876
.1218

.0747
.0012
.1314
−.0001
.0054
.0275
.0152
−.0021

0
0
−.0059
.1096
−.0717
−.1198
0
0

𝜔

𝑘

𝜎

markups, are mostly determined by the variation in interest rates net 
of g-fees, as largely summarized in Fig.  2. Price variation need not 
correspond to markups, as it can also be due to, for example, variation 
in marginal costs and service quality across lenders. While Figure C.3 
in Internet Appendix C.1 shows that the variation in interest rates net 
of g-fees is mostly similar even after effectively subtracting lender fixed 
effects, we also implement a completely different approach to estimate 
𝛼 based on the incomplete pass-through of changes in the secondary 
market.

Our approach is based on the observation that the price relative to 
par that a lender achieves in the secondary market depends on how 
the interest rate compares to the current coupon yield on MBS. An 
increase in the yield causes lenders to increase the interest rate to 
achieve the same revenue, which causes consumers to obtain fewer 
loans. However, if lenders charge markups, then they can adjust to an 
increase in the yield partly by decreasing the markup, resulting interest 
rates increasing by less than the implied cost. Internet Appendix D.3 
expands on this idea and derives an independent estimate of 𝛼 based on 
the response of interest rates and loan quantities to weekly changes in 
the yield. As a brief summary, we modify the model to incorporate the 
effect of the current coupon yield on a lender’s revenue, which changes 
Eq. (10) to 

𝑟𝑧
𝑗 − 𝐶𝐶𝑌 =

𝜌𝑗 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧
1 − 𝛿𝑧 +

1
𝛼(1 − 𝑠𝑧
𝑗 )

,

(14)

Based on this relationship and the determination of market shares like 
in Eq.  (5), changes in the yield lead to changes in interest rates and 
origination volumes (which in the model corresponds to ∑𝑛
𝑗=1 𝑠𝑗 ). In 
particular, if 𝐶𝐶𝑌  in (14) increases, then the interest rate 𝑟𝑧
𝑗  increases 
to maintain the equality. However, this increase in the interest rate 
causes the market share 𝑠𝑧
𝑗  to decrease, which causes the right hand 
side of (14) to decrease. As a result, the interest rate increases by less 
than the change in 𝐶𝐶𝑌 . The magnitude of the interest rate sensitivity 
𝛼 determines the relative magnitude of these changes. Intuitively, a 
small pass-through gap – that is, the difference between the change in 
the secondary market yield and the change in interest rates charged by 
lenders – relative to the change in quantities is consistent with a higher 
interest rate sensitivity 𝛼.

We find that an increase in the yield by 10 basis points is associated 
with a 13.5% decline in originations and a 6.3 (7.7) basis point increase 
in the weekly mean (median) of interest rates. We find the resulting 

estimate for the average 𝛼 is around 5.2 to 9.6, which is similar to 
our baseline estimate for the average 𝛼 of around 8.2 (obtained by 
𝛼0 − .005𝛼1 using the parameters in Table  6 and the average observable 
risk of .005).

5. Counterfactual: GSE loans effectively without intermediaries

In this section, we first show that a counterfactual effectively with-
out intermediaries can in principle lead to higher or lower interest rates 
due to the competing effects of higher origination costs (due to less 
screening) and lower markups. We then use the estimated model to 
determine that the counterfactual would reduce interest rates for all 
consumers, but to a lesser extent for observably risky consumers. We 
also discuss a potential implementation of the counterfactual through 
a standardized mortgage application platform.

5.1. Counterfactual definition

We  consider  a  counterfactual  in  which  all  applications  that  are 
accepted by the GSEs’ underwriting criteria are offered a loan and 
the  interest  rate  conditional  on  a  given  level  of  observable  risk  is 
determined by a zero-profits condition. In particular, the counterfactual 
is effectively without intermediaries since accept/reject decisions and 
interest rates are determined without any influence from third parties. 
We also assume that lenders are no longer distinguished and therefore 
eliminate the idiosyncratic shocks 𝜖𝑖𝑗 .36 We can summarize some key 
properties of the counterfactual as follows:

1. Denial rate = 0.
2. Default rate = 𝑞
1+𝑞
3. Interest rate = 𝜌+𝜔𝜆𝑑
1−𝜆𝑑

, which is also equal to 𝜆𝑑 .

, which we denote as 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙.

To determine which system (i.e., the baseline model with interme-
diaries or the counterfactual) yields greater benefits for consumers, we 
primarily consider which generates a lower average interest rate. On 
the one hand, the baseline model can lead to lower origination costs 
since lenders screen out some of the consumers that would default. 

36 Note that the counterfactual yields the same result as a market with 
perfect competition.

16 

 
 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

On the other hand, the baseline model also exhibits markups since 
lenders take advantage of distinguishing characteristics that are valued 
by consumers. To summarize this tradeoff, we can write the difference 
as

𝑟𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 − 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =

∑

𝑃 𝑧

𝑧

[ 𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧

1 − 𝛿𝑧 +

1
𝛼(1 − 𝑠𝑧)

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑟𝑧

]

−

𝜌 + 𝜔𝜆𝑑
1 − 𝜆𝑑

∑

𝑃 𝑧

=

𝑧

⎡
⎢
𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧
𝜌 + 𝜔𝜆𝑑
⎢
1 − 𝛿𝑧 −
⎢
1 − 𝜆𝑑
⎢
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎢
≤0
⎣

+

⎤
⎥
1
⎥
⎥
𝛼(1 − 𝑠𝑧)
⎥
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
⎥
>0
⎦

.

(15)

In the following subsection, we use the estimated model to determine 
which of these channels dominates.

Note that we abstract from various other potential benefits and costs 
that are outside the scope of the model. For example, independent risk 
pricing by lenders can provide a signal to regulators and policymakers 
about emerging risks in mortgage markets.37

5.2. Model results

Fig.   6  compares  the  baseline  model  and  the  counterfactual  for 
varying  levels  of  𝜆𝑑 ,  which  is  monotonically  related  to  observable 
risk.  We  find  that  interest  rates  are  higher  for  the  baseline  model 
for all levels of 𝜆𝑑 . Although intermediaries reduce origination costs 
by as much as 60%, they are still associated with a higher interest 
rate due to substantial markups. The difference between the interest 
rates decreases with 𝜆𝑑 , which reflects the greater cost-saving potential 
of intermediaries for riskier market segments.38 Besides the interest 
rate, Internet Appendix D.1 also compares the baseline model and the 
counterfactual with respect to the total surplus and its components.

Besides comparing the baseline model and the counterfactual, we 
also examine how outcomes in the baseline model vary with select 
parameters. Figure D.2 in Internet Appendix D.2 illustrates the role of 
the lender’s loss given default 𝜔. As 𝜔 increases, lenders invest more 
in screening to avoid costly defaults. They also charge higher interest 
rates due to the higher origination cost.

Finally, Figure D.3 in Internet Appendix D.2 illustrates the role of 
competition. As the number of lenders increases, markups naturally 
decrease. This in turn reduces the incentive to invest in screening, 
resulting in a higher default rate and origination cost. Overall, stronger 
competition tends to reduce the differences between the baseline model 
and the counterfactual.39

37 Note  that  pricing  of  credit  risk  for  GSE  loans  also  occurs  via  their 
credit risk transfer (CRT) securities, which allow investors to purchase cash 
flows from the GSEs that can vary with the performance of the reference 
mortgages. Since CRT securities refer to a pool of mortgages, they offer a 
relatively aggregated signal, whereas pricing by lenders occurs at the loan 
level. Furthermore, mispricing of risk by the g-fee could potentially also be 
inferred based on the rate at which banks keep loans on their portfolio, but 
that is also outside the scope of our analysis.
38 Note that some of the markup in the baseline model could correspond to 
unmodeled fixed costs, such as software, infrastructure, and facilities. To the 
extent that such fixed costs would also be present in the counterfactual, the 
interest rate in the counterfactual would also increase by a similar amount. 
In order for the counterfactual to generate the same interest rates as the 
baseline model for the riskiest borrowers, the fixed costs would have to account 
for about 13 basis points, or 42% of the markup for those borrowers. As 
borrower risk decreases, the magnitude of the fixed costs necessary to achieve 
the same interest rates in the baseline model and the counterfactual increases. 
For borrowers with the lowest risk, the fixed costs would have to account for 
about 20 basis points, which corresponds to almost all the markup for those 
borrowers.
39 Note, however, that the baseline model does not converge to the counter-
factual as 𝑛 increases, as lenders can always charge positive markups due to 
their product differentiation that appeals to consumers’ idiosyncratic tastes.

17 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

5.3. Discussion on the implementation of the counterfactual

The substantial markups in the baseline model are partly driven by 
limited shopping, as reflected by the fact that the number of lenders 
seriously considered by consumers 𝑛 is only equal to 2, consistent with 
the empirical median. This limited shopping is unlikely to be due to a 
lack of options, as there are about 1700 lenders in the sample and an 
average of 35 lenders per county. Instead, it more likely reflects search 
frictions, such as having to submit detailed information to lenders to 
obtain and compare price quotes.

We  therefore  consider  how  these  markups  could  potentially  be 
reduced by more closely emulating the counterfactual. Theoretically, 
the  counterfactual  produces  the  same  result  as  a  market  in  which 
lenders face perfect competition and have no market power. In terms 
of practical implementation, it can also be likened to a market in which 
borrowers apply for GSE loans through a standardized common mort-
gage application platform across lenders. Such a platform would verify 
the borrower’s information and confirm eligibility of the application 
for GSE mortgages through the GSEs’ automated underwriting system 
(AUS), then disseminate the information of AUS approved borrowers 
to lenders. Lenders could then make binding offers based on the in-
formation provided on the platform. Such a platform could ensure that 
lenders have access to the same information as well as allow borrowers 
to easily apply to and compare offers from many lenders. Note that an 
important requirement for this platform to work is to remove the put-
back risk. A potential concern is that intermediaries without skin in 
the game would have weaker incentives to avoid sending misleading 
information to the automated underwriting systems, resulting in more 
fraud.  However,  the  verification  process  would  be  implemented  by 
the  platform  before  the  application  is  sent  to  competitive  lenders. 
Moreover, for a significant share of borrowers – those with low leverage 
and full income documentation – this verification process can be fully 
automated at a relatively low cost.

6. Extension: heterogeneous lenders

In this section, we extend our analysis to examine how intermedia-
tion patterns vary by lender type, specifically focusing on banks versus 
nonbanks. We observe that nonbanks are associated with greater ob-
servable risk, greater interest rates conditional on observable risk, and 
greater default rates conditional on observable risk. We then rationalize 
these observations with a model in which nonbank lenders have a lower 
expected loss given default and a higher funding cost.

6.1. Empirical variation in intermediation patterns by lender type

Fig.  7 compares banks and nonbanks with respect to three charac-

teristics as a function of observable risk.

First, Fig.  7(a) shows that the market share of nonbanks increases 
with observable risk. Column (2) of Table  9 shows that the likelihood 
of a nonbank lender increases by about 3.8 percentage points for a 1 
percentage point increase in observable risk when including ZIP code 
by year-quarter fixed effects and controlling for loan amount decile 
indicators and an indicator for full income and asset documentation. 
This result is similar to the findings in Buchak et al. (2018) and Kim 
et al. (2018) that nonbanks are associated with lower credit scores 
and higher debt-to-income ratios for GSE loans. However, our result 
is distinct from the conclusion in Buchak et al. (2018) that nonbank 
borrowers are not clearly more or less creditworthy due to also be-
ing associated with lower loan-to-value ratios. We also observe that 
nonbanks  are  associated  with  lower  loan-to-value  ratios  (see  Table 
E.1 in Internet Appendix E), but we nevertheless find that they are 
associated with an average 11 basis points higher default risk (relative 
to a mean of 50 basis points) based on our measure of observable risk 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Fig. 6.  The Effects of Intermediaries.
These figures show various features of the model of the baseline model (in which lenders screen the applicant, approve or deny the application, and engage in imperfect competition 
to determine the interest rate) and the counterfactual (a setting where all applications approved by the GSEs are originated and the interest rate is determined by a zero-profits 
condition) for various levels of 𝜆𝑑 . The denial rate is the probability that a consumer’s loan application is rejected. The default rate is the fraction of approved applications that 
consist of defaulting consumers. The interest rate (IR) for the baseline model, which is reported in basis points, is decomposed as the origination cost (which is the zero-profits 
interest rate), the information cost (which is the cost associated with the information level 𝜓), and markups less information cost. See Table  6 for parameters.

that jointly incorporates credit scores, higher debt-to-income ratios, and 
loan-to-value ratios.40

Second, Fig.  7(b) shows that nonbanks are associated with higher 
interest rates net of g-fees conditional on observable risk. Column (2) 
of Table  9 shows that the average difference is about 4.8 basis points, 
while  column  (3)  shows  that  the  difference  slightly  increases  with 
observable risk.41 This observation, which is similar to other results 

40 To supplement the market shares in Fig.  7(a), Figure E.1 in Internet 
Appendix E shows that the kernel density and cumulative distribution function 
of observable risk are slightly more concentrated at higher values for nonbanks 
compared  to  banks.  Additionally,  the  histograms  in  Figure  E.2  show  that 
nonbanks are associated with lower credit scores, higher debt-to-income ratios, 
lower loan-to-value ratios, and higher observable risk.
41 Table  E.2  in  Internet  Appendix  E  shows  that  the  results  are  simi-
lar  when  using  origination  revenue  rather  than  the  interest  rate.  Table 
E.3  shows  that  the  results  are  similar  when  comparing  banks  to  either 
nonbank-fintechs  or  nonbank-nonfintechs.  Nonbank-fintechs  are  associated 
with generally higher interest rates, which could also reflect a premium for 
greater convenience (Buchak et al., 2018).

in the literature (e.g., Buchak et al., 2018, Benson et al., 2023), is 
consistent with nonbanks having higher funding costs, possibly due to 
nonbanks’ use of warehouse financing lines rather than insured deposits 
(e.g., Jiang, 2023). It is also consistent with nonbanks exhibiting higher 
default rates conditional on observable risk, as described further in the 
next paragraph.

Third, Fig.  7(c) shows that nonbanks are associated with higher 
default rates conditional on observable risk. Column (4) of Table  9 
shows that the average difference between banks and nonbanks is 16.8 
basis points, which is substantial relative to the average default rate 
of 50 basis points. Column (5) shows that the difference is only 2.6 
basis points and statistically insignificant for low-risk borrowers, but it 
increases by 27.8 basis points for each percentage point of observable 
risk.42  This  observation  updates  previous  work  indicating  that  the 
association between nonbanks and default for GSE loans is small in 

42 Table E.3 in Internet Appendix E shows that the results are similar when 
comparing banks to nonbank-nonfintechs. Nonbank-fintechs tend to have more 
defaults for low levels of observable risk but less steep of an increase with 
observable risk.

18 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Fig. 7.  Empirical comparison of banks and nonbanks.
Fig.  7(a) presents a binned scatterplot of dummy variables indicating whether a loan was sold to the GSEs by a bank or a nonbank on observable risk while controlling for 
origination year-month fixed effects. These estimates correspond to the respective market shares. Observable risk is the estimated probability of default based on the credit score, 
loan-to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1. Fig.  7(b) presents a binned scatterplot of the interest rate net of the total g-fee on observable risk while 
controlling for origination year-month fixed effects and splitting by bank and nonbank sellers. Fig.  7(c) presents a binned scatterplot of default (multiplied by 100) on the interest 
rate net of the total g-fee while controlling for origination year-month fixed effects and observable risk and splitting by bank and nonbank sellers.
Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac),2016–2017, restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or no cash-out refinance loans for one-unit, owner-
occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with subordinate financing, loans with a loan-to-value 
ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from the first table of the g-fee matrix by more than 25 basis points.

Table 9
Empirical comparison of banks and nonbanks.
(1)
Nonbank

  Observable risk

  Nonbank

  Observable risk ×Nonbank

4.718***
(68.33)

(2)
Nonbank

3.825***
(52.39)

(3)
IR-gfee

0.048***
(132.83)
0.048***
(95.32)

(4)
IR-gfee

0.045***
(91.92)
0.046***
(77.48)
0.004***
(6.21)

(5)
Default

0.947***
(41.78)
0.168***
(9.87)

875,464
0.007
No
Yes
No

875,464
0.178
No
Yes
Yes

  Observations
  𝑅2
  Year-month FE
  ZIP ×Year-quarter FE
  Controls
Note: Column (1) regresses an indicator for a nonbank (multiplied by 100) on observable risk while controlling for year-month fixed effects. Observable risk is the estimated 
probability of default based on the credit score, loan-to-value ratio, and debt-to-income ratio as described in Section 2.1. Column (2) is similar except including ZIP code by 
year-quarter fixed effects and adding the following controls: loan amount decile indicators and an indicator for full income and asset documentation. Column (3) is analogous 
except that the dependent variable is the interest rate net of g-fees and we add the nonbank indicator. Column (4) is similar to column (3) except adding the interaction between 
the nonbank indicator and observable risk. Columns (5) and (6) are analogous to (3) and (4) except that the dependent variable is an indicator for default (multiplied by 100). 
T-statistics computed using robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and 
*** indicates significance at the 1% level. Source: Mortgage Loan Information System (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac), 2016–2017, restricting to fixed rate, 30-year, purchase or 
no cash-out refinance loans for one-unit, owner-occupied, single-family detached houses and excluding high balance loans exceeding the base conforming loan limit, loans with 
subordinate financing, loans with a loan-to-value ratio exceeding 80%, and loans where the upfront g-fee deviates from the first table of the g-fee matrix by more than 25 basis 
points.

875,464
0.651
No
Yes
Yes

875,464
0.154
No
Yes
Yes

875,464
0.651
No
Yes
Yes

(6)
Default
0.806*** 
(27.53)  
0.026
(1.32)
0.278*** 
(6.18)
875,464  
0.154
No
Yes
Yes

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Fig. 8.  Comparison of heterogeneous 𝜔, 𝑘, and 𝜌.
These figures show various features of the version of the model with 2 lenders and heterogeneous loss given default 𝜔 (left panels), heterogeneous cost of screening 𝑘 (middle 
panels), or heterogeneous funding costs (right panels). The origination market share refers to the share of originated loans associated with a particular lender. The interest rate (IR), 
which is reported in basis points, is the signal-weighted average interest rate, as described further in Section 4.3. The default rate is the fraction of approved applications that 
consist of defaulting consumers.

magnitude (Buchak et al., 2018) or insignificant (Kim et al., 2022). 
In particular, we focus on a sample of loans originated in 2016–2017, 
whereas (Buchak et al., 2018) focuses on loans originated in 2010–2013 
and Kim et al. (2022) considers loans originated in 2005–2015. Figure 
E.3c and Table E.6 in Internet Appendix E show that the association 
between nonbanks and defaults became more positive from 2013 to 
2017.43

6.2. Model with heterogeneous lenders

In this section, we use extensions of the model with heterogeneous 
lenders to determine that the differences between banks and nonbanks 
are more consistent with the latter having a lower expected loss given 
default rather than differences in screening costs. We also consider the 
implications of this result for the increasing market share of nonbanks.

43 Note that Figure E.3b and Table E.4 in Internet Appendix E show that the 
association between nonbanks and observable risk slightly increased during 
this period. Figure E.3c and Table E.5 show that the association between 
nonbanks and interest rates also slightly increased.

Fig.  8 shows various model outcomes as a function of 𝜆𝑑 when there 
is heterogeneity in the loss given default 𝜔, screening cost 𝑘, or funding 
cost 𝜌.

In the case of heterogeneous loss given default, the low loss given 
default lender originates relatively more loans as 𝜆𝑑 increases. This 
higher weighting on observably risky borrowers is driven by the fact 
that the low loss given default lender charges a lower interest rate 
conditional on a borrower’s signal, which allows it to attract more 
borrowers. This pricing advantage becomes more pronounced for bor-
rowers with greater observable risk since the lower rate of loss given 
default  has  a  larger  absolute  impact.  Note  that  the  low  loss  given 
default lender still has about the same or slightly higher interest rates 
on average since a greater fraction of its borrowers have weaker signals. 
Overall, these patterns are consistent with the empirical risk profile of 
nonbanks relative to banks, as Fig.  7(a) shows that nonbanks lend more 
to observably risky consumers, Fig.  7(b) shows that nonbanks have 
higher interest rates conditional on observable risk, and Fig.  7(c) shows 
that nonbanks experience more defaults conditional on observable risk.
In the case of heterogeneous screening costs, similar to the low loss 
given default lender in the previous case, the high screening cost lender 
acquires less information, resulting in a higher default rate. It also has a 
higher average interest rate to compensate for this risk, which is driven 

20 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Fig. 9.  Model emulation of banks and nonbanks.
These figures show various features of the version of the model with a bank lender and a nonbank lender. The nonbank lender has higher funding costs 𝜌 and lower loss given 
default 𝜔. The origination market share refers to the share of originated loans associated with a particular lender. The interest rate (IR), which is reported in basis points, is the 
signal-weighted average interest rate, as described further in Section 4.3. The default rate is the fraction of approved applications that consist of defaulting consumers.

by the fact that a greater fraction of its borrowers have weaker signals. 
However, conditional on a borrower’s signal, the high screening cost 
lender charges the same interest rate as the low screening cost lender. 
Therefore, the high screening cost lender lacks an analogous pricing 
advantage to the low loss given default lender. As a result, even if we 
select the differences in screening costs to generate a similar difference 
in the default rate as the case with heterogeneous loss given default, 
we observe a smaller and opposite overall effect on observable risk, in 
contrast to Fig.  7(a).

Finally, in the case of heterogeneous funding costs, the lender with 
higher funding costs naturally charges higher interest rates, resulting 
in a lower market share. These differences are mostly constant with 
respect to observable risk. The difference in the default rate is small by 
comparison.

Overall, the empirical findings are more consistent with nonbanks 
having a lower expected loss given default rather than screening costs. 
This lower expected loss given default could be attributable to non-
banks typically being monolines and therefore having less of a concern 
to  protect  profits  from  other  product  offerings.  The  higher  interest 
rates charged by nonbanks even for low risk borrowers is consistent 
with nonbanks also having higher funding costs. Fig.  9 shows that 
associating nonbanks with a higher funding cost and lower loss given 

default qualitatively emulates the empirical observations in Fig.  7.44 
Based on the association between nonbanks and lower funding costs, 
Figure  D.2  in  Internet  Appendix  D  suggests  that  a  transition  from 
a market dominated by banks to a market dominated by nonbanks 
would result in higher default rates. It would also result in relatively 
lower interest rates for risky borrowers, although the absolute effect 
on interest rates would also depend on the relative magnitudes of the 
difference in the loss given default and funding costs.

Figure E.4 in Internet Appendix E further shows that the observed 
increasing market share and default rates of nonbanks from 2013 to 
2017 is consistent with three changes in the model. The first change is 
a consumer preference shock in favor of nonbanks, which we model 
by  adding  a  term  𝐴 ∗ 1{𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘}  in  the  utility  (4).  This  preference 
shock increases the nonbank market share and interest rate. The second 
change is a relative reduction in nonbanks’ cost of funding 𝜌, which 
also increases nonbanks’ market share but decreases their interest rates 
relative to banks. The consumer preference shock and cost of funding 

44 The  model  generates  less  steep  of  an  increase  in  the  market  share 
compared to Fig.  7(a). However, a comparison of column (1) and column (2) 
of Table  9 suggests that the empirical slope with observable risk becomes less 
steep after accounting for geographic fixed effects and other controls.

21 

J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

shock are jointly determined to significantly increase nonbanks’ market 
share while only slightly increasing their interest rates. Finally, the 
third change is a relative reduction in nonbanks’ loss given default 
𝜔, which increases their default rates and leads to a slightly stronger 
correlation between nonbanks and observable risk.

7. Conclusion

We analyze the trade-offs of how intermediaries shape the origina-
tion of GSE mortgages. Specifically, we show that mortgage interest 
rates net of g-fees increase with observable risk, consistent with lenders 
independently pricing for risk. Interest rates also predict default condi-
tional on observable risk, consistent with lender screening. We develop 
a model of mortgage lender competition with screening that explains 
these observations by supposing that lenders of GSE mortgages face 
a positive expected loss given default. We estimate the model based 
on  our  empirical  observations  and  compare  it  to  a  counterfactual 
effectively without intermediaries. The model shows that intermedi-
aries reduce costs but also charge substantial markups, resulting in 
higher interest rates, although to a lesser extent for observably risky 
borrowers.

In an extension of our analysis focused on different types of lenders, 
we observe that nonbanks, which comprise an increasing share of the 
mortgage market, exhibit different intermediation patterns compared to 
banks, such as higher observable risk, higher default rates conditional 
on observable risk, and higher interest rates conditional on observable 
risk. The model suggests that these differences are consistent with non-
banks having a lower expected loss given default. The model suggests 
that the increasing market share of nonbanks may lead to an increase in 
default rates and less steep of an increase in interest rates with respect 
to observable risk.

From a policy perspective, our counterfactual analysis suggests that 
implementing the GSE segment of the mortgage through private inter-
mediaries is most likely to benefit observably risky borrowers, if any. 
Additionally, while the increasing presence of nonbank lenders, which 
are more associated with observably risky consumers, could improve 
access to credit, it could also lead to a riskier pool of consumers, albeit 
still within the underwriting requirements of the GSEs.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Joshua Bosshardt: Writing – review & editing, Writing – origi-
nal draft, Validation, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization. Ali Kakhbod: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Validation, Resources, Methodology, Inves-
tigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Amir Kermani: Writing 
–  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Validation,  Resources, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Proof of Eqs. (10) and (11)

To derive the first order condition for 𝑟𝑧

𝑗 , first observe that by using 

𝛿𝐿 = 0 and 𝛿𝑀 = 𝑞

1+𝑞  it is convenient to write lender profits as 

𝛱𝑗 =

∑

𝑧

1{𝑧=𝐿}
𝜓
𝑗

(1 − 𝜓𝑗 )1{𝑧=𝑀}
1 − 𝛿𝑧

𝑠𝑧
𝑗

(𝑟𝑧

)
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑧) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧)

− 𝑐(𝜓𝑗 )

(A.1)

Then the first order condition for 𝑟𝑧

𝑗  is

0 =

𝜕𝛱𝑗
𝜕𝑟𝑧
𝑗

22 

∝

=

=

⟹ 𝑟𝑧

𝑗 =

)
(
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑧) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧)
𝑟𝑧

+ 𝑠𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑧)

𝜕𝑠𝑧
𝑗
𝜕𝑟𝑧
𝑗
−𝛼 exp(𝜇 − 𝛼𝑟𝑧

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

×

(

𝑗 ) − (−𝛼 exp(𝜇 − 𝛼𝑟𝑧
(
1 + ∑𝑛
𝑘=1 exp(𝜇 − 𝛼𝑟𝑧
𝑘)
)
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑧) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧)
𝑟𝑧
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑧)
𝑗 (1 − 𝑠𝑧
𝑗 )

)
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑧) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧)
𝑟𝑧

] (

+ 𝑠𝑧
[
−𝛼𝑠𝑧
𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑧
1 − 𝛿𝑧 +

1
𝛼(1 − 𝑠𝑧
𝑗 )

.

𝑗 ) exp(𝜇 − 𝛼𝑟𝑧
𝑗 ))
)2

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

+ 𝑠𝑧

𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑧)

(A.2)

Differentiating lender profits as written in Eq.  (9) by 𝜓𝑗 yields

0 =

𝜕𝛱𝑗
𝜕𝜓𝑗
𝑗 − 𝜌)
(𝑟𝐿
𝑗 − 𝜌)
(𝑟𝐿

= 𝑠𝐿
𝑗
⟹ 𝑐′(𝜓𝑗 ) = 𝑠𝐿
𝑗
Note that by substituting in 𝑟𝑧
as 

− (1 + 𝑞)𝑠𝑀
𝑗
− (1 + 𝑞)𝑠𝑀
𝑗

(𝑟𝑀
(𝑟𝑀

)
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑀 ) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑀 )
− 𝑐′(𝜓𝑗 )
).
𝑗 (1 − 𝛿𝑀 ) − (𝜌 + 𝜔𝛿𝑀 )
𝑗  from Eq.  (10), this can also be written 

(A.3)

𝑐′(𝜓𝑗 ) =

𝑠𝐿
𝑗
𝛼(1 − 𝑠𝐿
𝑗 )

−

𝑠𝑀
𝑗
𝛼(1 − 𝑠𝑀
𝑗 )

.

Appendix B. Supplementary data

(A.4)

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104082.

Data availability

Replication of "Do Intermediaries Improve GSE Lending? Evidence fro
m Proprietary GSE Data" (Reference data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Working Paper.

187–207.

selection. Working paper.

Agarwal, S., Amromin, G., Chomsisengphet, S., Landvoigt, T., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 
Tao, V., 2022. Mortgage refinancing, consumer spending, and competition: Evi-
dence from the home affordable refinance program. Rev. Financ. Stud. 90 (2), 
499–537.

Agarwal, S., Grigsby, J., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., Seru, A., Yao, V., 2020. Searching 

for approval. NBER Working Paper No. 27341.

Alexandrov, A., Koulayev, S., 2018. No shopping in the U.S. mortgage market: Direct 

and strategic effects of providing information. Working Paper.

Amromin, G., Kearns, C., 2014. Access to refinancing and mortgage interest rates: 
Harping  on  the  importance  of  competition.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago 
Working Paper 2014-25.

Benetton, M., Buchak, G., Robles-Garcia, C., 2022. Wide or narrow? Competition and 

scope in financial intermediation. Working paper.

Benson, D., Kim, Y., Pence, K., 2023. Nonbank issuers and mortgage credit supply. 

Berg, T., Fuster, A., Puri, M., 2022. FinTech lending. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 14, 

Beyhaghi,  M.,  Fracassi,  C.,  Weitzner,  G.,  2022.  Bank  loan  markups  and  adverse 

Bhutta, N., Fuster, A., Hizmo, A., 2021. Paying too much? Borrower sophistication and 

overpayment in the US mortgage market. Working Paper.

Bhutta, N., Hizmo, A., Ringo, D., 2025. How much does racial bias affect mortgage 
lending? Evidence from human and algorithmic credit decisions. J. Financ..
Bosshardt, J., Di Maggio, M., Kakhbod, A., Kermani, A., 2024. The credit supply channel 
of monetary policy tightening and its distributional impacts. J. Financ. Econ. 160.
Buchak, G., Jørring, A., 2021. Do mortgage lenders compete locally? Implications for 

credit access. Working Paper.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and 

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2024. Beyond the balance sheet model 
of banking: Implications for bank regulation and monetary policy. J. Political Econ. 
132 (2), 616–693.

DeFusco, A., Johnson, S., Mondragon, J., 2020. Regulating household leverage. Rev. 

Econ. Stud. 87 (2), 914–958.

J. Bosshardt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104082 

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Keys, B., Piskorski, T., Ramcharan, R., Seru, A., Yao, V., 
2017.  Interest  rate  pass-through:  Mortgage  rates,  household  consumption,  and 
voluntary deleveraging. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (11), 3550–3588.

Di  Maggio,  M.,  Yao,  V.,  2021.  Fintech  borrowers:  Lax  screening  or  cream-

skimming? Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (10), 4565–4618.

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility: 

Evidence from the US banking sector. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 169–216.

Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2020. Long-run growth of financial data technology. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 110 (8), 2485–2523.

credit (2022Q3).

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2022. Quarterly report on household debt and 

Fuster, A., Lo, S., Willen, P., 2024. The time-varying price of financial intermediation 

in the mortgage market. J. Financ. 79 (4), 2553–2602.

Fuster,  A.,  Plosser,  M.,  Schnabl,  P.,  Vickery,  J.,  2019.  The  role  of  technology  in 

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1854–1899.

Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Vickery, J., 2021. Does CFPB oversight crimp credit? Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 857.

Jagtiani, J., Lambie-Hanson, L., Lambie-Hanson, T., 2021. Fintech lending and mortgage 

credit access. J. FinTech 1 (1).

Jansen,  M.,  Nguyen,  H.,  Shams,  A.,  2021.  Rise  of  the  machines:  The  impact  of 

automated underwriting. Working paper.

Jiang, E., 2023. Financing competitors: Shadow banks’ funding and mortgage market 

competition. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (10), 3861–3905.

Jiang,  E.,  Yang,  G.,  Zhang,  J.,  2023.  Bank  competition  amid  digital  disruption: 

Implications for financial inclusion. Working Paper.

Johnson, S., 2022. Financial technology and the 1990s housing boom.
Keys, B., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2012. Lender screening and the role of securitization: 
Evidence from prime and subprime mortgage markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (7), 
2071–2108.

Kim, Y., Laufer, S., Pence, K., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2018. Liquidity crises in the 
mortgage market. In: Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2018 ed. pp. 
347–428.

Kim, Y.S., Pence, K., Stanton, R., Walden, J., Wallace, N., 2022. Nonbanks and mortgage 

securitization. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 14, 137–166.

Fuster, A., Willen, P., 2017. Payment size, negative equity, and mortgage default. Am. 

Kulkarni, N., 2016. Are uniform pricing policies unfair? Mortgage rates, credit rationing, 

Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 9 (4), 167–191.

Gao, P., Schultz, P., Song, Z., 2017. Liquidity in a market for unique assets: Specified 
pool and to-be-announced trading in the mortgage-backed securities market. J. 
Financ. 72 (3), 1119–1170.

Gerardi, K., Willen, P., Zhang, D., 2023. Mortgage prepayment, race, and monetary 

policy. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (3), 498–524.

Gete, P., Reher, M., 2020. Mortgage securitization and shadow bank lending. Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 34 (5), 2236–2274.

and regional inequality. Working Paper.

Lester, B., Shourideh, A., Venkateswaran, V., Zetlin-Jones, A., 2019. Screening and 

adverse selection in frictional markets. J. Political Econ. 127 (1), 338–377.

Mahoney, N., Weyl, E.G., 2017. Imperfect competition in selection markets. Rev. Econ. 

Stat. 99 (4), 637–651.

Malliaris, S., Rettl, D., Singh, R., 2021. Is competition a cure for confusion? Evidence 

from the residenial mortgage market. Real Estate Econ. 50 (1), 206–246.

Scharfstein,  D.,  Sunderam,  A.,  2016.  Market  power  in  mortgage  lending  and  the 

Goodman, L., 2017. Quantifying the tightness of mortgage credit and assessing policy 

transmission of monetary policy. Working Paper.

actions. Boston Coll. J. Law Soc. Justice 37 (2), 235–265.

Gupta,  A.,  2019.  Foreclosure  contagion  and  the  neighborhood  spillover  effects  of 

mortgage default. J. Financ. 74 (5), 2249–2301.

Hansen,  L.,  1982.  Large  sample  properties  of  generalized  method  of  moments 

estimators. Econometrica 50 (4), 1029–1054.

Train, K., 2009. Discrete Choie Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press.
Woodward, S., Hall, R., 2012. Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-optimal shop-
ping  effort:  Theory  and  mortgage-market  evidence.  Am.  Econ.  Rev.  107  (7), 
3249–3276.

Yannelis, C., Zhang, A., 2023. Competition and selection in credit markets. J. Financ. 

Hansen, B.E., 2022. Econometrics. Princeton University Press.
Hurst, E., Keys, B., Seru, A., Vavra, J., 2016. Regional redistribution through the US 

mortgage market. Am. Econ. Rev. 106 (10), 2982–3028.

Econ. 150 (2).

Working Paper.

Zhang, D., 2022. Closing costs, refinancing, and inefficiencies in the mortgage market. 

23 

