Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Entrepreneurial spillovers across coworkers(cid:73)
Melanie Wallskog ∗
Duke University, United States of America

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

How do workplace social connections shape everyday entrepreneurship? Using comprehensive data on millions 
of American workers across the economy, I find three key patterns. First, entrepreneurial coworkers inspire 
and teach entrepreneurship: individuals are more likely to become entrepreneurs after working with coworkers 
who previously led young businesses. Second, these effects predominantly occur within demographic groups, 
perpetuating lower entrepreneurship rates for women and Black Americans. Third, these workplace spillovers 
can increase productivity: individuals exposed to relatively successful coworkers subsequently run successful 
companies too.

Dataset link: Replication Package for Wallskog (
JFE 2025): Entrepreneurial Spillovers Across C
oworkers (Original data)

JEL classification:
Codes
L26
J01
J22
O4

Keywords:
Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurial Finance
Labor and Finance

Entrepreneurship is commonly regarded as a vital source of eco-
nomic growth, with young firms contributing disproportionately to em-
ployment growth (Haltiwanger et al. (2013)) and innovation (Klenow 
and Li (2021)). Yet the pathway along which individuals transition 
from ordinary work to entrepreneurship is fraught with many chal-
lenges, ranging from developing a business idea to learning the logistics 
of  running  a  firm  to  accessing  capital  and  other  resources.  These 
challenges likely bite differently for different populations, given large 
demographic gaps in entrepreneurship rates. For example, in the mid-
2000s, only 41% of new business leaders were women, despite women 
making up 47% of the workforce; meanwhile, only 5% of new business 

leaders were Black, despite Blacks representing 10% of the workforce 
(Table  1).1

In this paper, I study one potential launchpad for entrepreneur-
ship: exposure to entrepreneurial peers in the workplace. A growing 
literature  has  shown  that  entrepreneurs  can  inspire  and  teach  fu-
ture entrepreneurship in a variety of settings, and the workplace is 
a natural venue in which individuals may meet others with differing 
backgrounds and experience from whom they can learn. Indeed, Amer-
icans may be more likely to meet people from different backgrounds at 
their jobs than in other domains of their lives — for example, Chetty 
et al. (2022) find that low socioeconomic status (SES) individuals have 

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. Thanks to Toni Whited and the referee for valuable comments. Thanks to Nick Bloom, Pete Klenow, and Isaac 
Sorkin for patient advising and support. Thanks also to Luis Armona, Adrien Auclert, Shai Bernstein, Varanya Chaubey, Henry Chen, Nathan Goldshlag, Camille 
Hebert, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, Kevin McKinney, Scott Ohlmacher, Thomas Pearson, Bitsy Perlman, Michael Pollmann, David Robinson, Kristin Sandusky, 
Jim Spletzer, Cristina Tello-Trillo, my Stanford classmates, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. Thanks to Michael Freiman, Shawn Klimek, 
and Scott Ohlmacher for assistance with the disclosure process. Any views expressed are those of the author and not those of the U.S. Census Bureau. The Census 
Bureau’s Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have reviewed this data product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and 
have approved the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this release. This research was performed under project DMS 7512395. (DRB clearance numbers: 
CBDRB-FY21-CED006-0007, CBDRB-FY21-CED006-0020, CBDRB-FY22-CED006-0002, CBDRB-FY23-CED006-0009, and CBDRB-FY25-CED006-004). This research 
was supported generously by the Institute for Research in the Social Sciences (IRiSS) at Stanford University and by the Bradley Graduate Fellowship through 
a grant to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. This material is also based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate 
Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-1656518. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those 
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. All errors are my own.

∗ Correspondence to: 100 Fuqua Drive, Durham, NC, 27708, United States.

E-mail address:  melanie.wallskog@duke.edu.

and 0.5% of entrepreneurs, respectively (Calder-Wang and Gompers (2017)).

1 These shares are significantly smaller in the hyper-selected setting of venture capital-backed startups, in which women and Blacks represent less than 9% 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104077
Received 16 August 2024; Received in revised form 8 April 2025; Accepted 12 April 2025
Available online 13 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Table 1
Individuals who become entrepreneurs are different from the average worker.

All individuals
Mean
(1)

Std dev
(2)

N (M)
(3)

Future entrepreneurs
Mean
(4)

Std Dev
(5)

N (M)
(6)

T-Stat
(4)–(1)  
(7)

0.034
0.009
0.031
0.034
0.029
0.021

0.180
0.096
0.174
0.095
0.093
0.083

0.090
0.032
1.000
0.064
0.057
0.038

1.456
1.456
1.456
1.456
1.456
1.456

46.68
46.68
46.68
46.68
46.68
46.68

0.287
0.175
0.000
0.147
0.143
0.118

237.0
152.8
38 084.6 
248.0
234.9
170.4

0.47
0.73
0.10
0.01
0.05
0.10
39.09
0.28
0.34
0.26
0.18

  Panel A: Entrepreneurship
  Recent entrepreneur
  Current entrepreneur
  Future entrepreneur
  Share cow. entr.
  Share cow. survived, age 2
  Share cow. survived, age 5
  Panel B: Demographics
  Female
  White
  Black
  Native American
  Asian
  Hispanic
  Age
  High school
  Some college
  College
  Born outside the U.S.
  Panel C: 2004 Job Characteristics
  Annual earnings
  Log(annual earnings)
  Years since joined firm
  Years until leave firm
  Panel D: 2004 Establishment Characteristics
−675.5  
  Log(employment)
46.68
−322.3  
  Firm age
46.68
Note: This table compares all individuals in 2004 vs. the subset who become entrepreneurs between 2005 and 2009. Recent (current) 
entrepreneurship occurs between 1999 and 2003 (in 2004). ‘‘Share cow. entr.’’ indicates the share of the individual’s coworkers who were 
recent entrepreneurs; ‘‘Share cow. survived, age [A]’’ indicates the share of the individual’s coworkers who were recent entrepreneurs and 
whose firms survived to an A-th year after entry. Demographics are only reported for individuals with non-imputed values. Observation counts 
are in millions, as denoted in the header by ‘‘M.’’

−135.8  
122.8
−269.3  
−19.4
60.3
−22.1
−183.2  
−17.0
−4.3
29.3
64.7

0.49
0.41
0.21
0.08
0.25
0.29
11.00
0.44
0.47
0.46
0.40

0.50
0.44
0.30
0.08
0.22
0.29
11.83
0.45
0.48
0.44
0.39

46.68
36.37
36.37
36.37
36.37
36.37
46.68
4.234
4.234
4.234
46.68

0.41
0.78
0.05
0.01
0.07
0.09
37.39
0.25
0.34
0.30
0.20

1.456
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.456
0.125
0.125
0.125
1.456

25.1
49.9
−182.5  
−844.3  

185,400
1.43
2.90
2.02

155,300
1.51
3.15
3.07

41,140
9.82
3.53
1.58

37,240
9.76
3.97
3.04

46.68
46.68
46.68
46.68

1.456
1.456
1.456
1.456

1.456
1.456

2.46
3.25

4.08
7.96

2.35
3.65

5.42
8.95

higher  exposure  to  high  SES  peers  in  the  workplace  than  in  their 
high schools, recreational and religious groups, and neighborhoods. If 
working alongside coworkers with entrepreneurial experience encour-
ages entrepreneurship, as previously suggested by Nanda and Sørensen 
(2010), then the workplace might give access to entrepreneurship to a 
wide array of people. Simply put, many more people have coworkers, 
and thus could have coworkers with entrepreneurial lessons to teach, 
than matriculate in MBA programs. If entrepreneurial coworkers are 
common and give ‘‘good’’ advice, their presence could lower the barri-
ers to entrepreneurship for many individuals, including entrepreneurial 
minorities like women and Black Americans.

I characterize how social connections in the workplace shape the 
landscape of everyday entrepreneurship. I do this in three steps that 
cover the five W’s — ‘‘who’’, ‘‘what’’, ‘‘when’’, ‘‘where’’, and ‘‘why’’ 
(and ‘‘how’’) — of entrepreneurial learning from coworkers. First, I 
show  that  individuals  learn  entrepreneurship  from  their  coworkers 
(the ‘‘what’’): individuals who work alongside former entrepreneurs 
are more likely to lead firms themselves subsequently, such that en-
trepreneurial coworkers generate ‘‘spillovers’’ in the form of more new 
firms. Second, I find that, while these spillovers are common phenom-
ena across the economy, the spillovers occur predominantly within de-
mographic groups, if at all (the ‘‘who’’, ‘‘when’’, and ‘‘where’’). Women 
only  learn  entrepreneurship  from  their  —  rare  —  female  cowork-
ers with entrepreneurial experience, and Black Americans experience 
almost no learning. This means that, despite workplaces bringing to-
gether workers from different backgrounds, entrepreneurial learning 
across coworkers actually exacerbates diversity issues in entrepreneur-
ship. Third, these spillovers convey lessons that subsequently gener-
ate firms that mimic the coworkers’ previous firms (the ‘‘why’’ and 
‘‘how’’). Because most entrepreneurs are not superstars, entrepreneurial 
coworkers on average inspire mediocre new firms; but, individuals who 
are ‘‘lucky enough’’ to work with relatively successful entrepreneurial 
coworkers appear to learn skills that translate into their own success as 
entrepreneurs.

I take these steps in turn by using data on over forty million Ameri-
cans from the U.S. Census Bureau, where I leverage the richness of the 
data to characterize who is affected and the lessons learned. I combine 
longitudinal  information  on  individuals  and  their  coworkers  in  the 
Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data with Census 
Bureau data on firms’ outcomes. The scope of this data, which is large 
and spans many demographic groups, states, and industries, allows 
me to explore the heterogeneity of these spillovers and to construct 
estimates that are relevant in the national context; importantly, this 
paper studies ‘‘everyday entrepreneurship’’ — e.g., individuals starting 
new restaurants and shops, rather than venture capital-backed tech 
startups — which represents the modal entrepreneurship in the econ-
omy. Furthermore, studying the characteristics of the firms that arise 
through these spillovers allows me both to evaluate the productivity 
implications of these spillovers and to characterize the lessons learned 
through these spillovers.2

The first step of the paper addresses the ‘‘what’’ question of en-
trepreneurial learning across coworkers: namely, what is the role of 
coworkers with previous entrepreneurship in generating new firms? 
I estimate entrepreneurial spillovers across establishment coworkers 
by  leveraging  variation  in  individuals’  exposure  to  coworkers  with 
prior (within the past five years) entrepreneurial experience. As Fig.  1 
demonstrates, working with a larger share of entrepreneurial cowork-
ers predicts entrepreneurship. I find that individuals who work with 
one standard deviation (about 10 percentage points) higher share of 
coworkers who were entrepreneurs in the past five years are 8% more 

2 I  follow  the  recent  literature  and  call  an  individual  an  entrepreneur 
if  they  are  one  of  the  top  three  earners  at  a  new  firm  and  likely  hold 
influential positions at young firms (Agarwal et al. (2016), Kerr and Kerr 
(2017), and Azoulay et al. (2018)). I test the robustness of this definition in 
Section A.1.

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Wallskog

Fig. 1.  Working with entrepreneurial coworkers predicts entrepreneurship.
Note: This figure that exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers predicts entrepreneurship. 
The figure presents the estimated coefficients from binscatter version of model (1), 
where the share of coworkers with entrepreneurial experience is replaced by indicators 
for having the share fall in different bins, e.g., between 0 and 0.01, 0.01, and 0.02, 
etc; the omitted bin is the indicator for having the share equal to zero (for expositional 
purposes, bins for coworker shares greater than 0.55 are excluded from the figure; fewer 
than 0.5% of workers fall into these bins). See column 5 of Table  2 for comparable 
linear specification.

likely to become entrepreneurs themselves in the next five years, rel-
ative to the average likelihood: exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers 
appears to nudge individuals towards entrepreneurship.3

While  establishing  the  causality  of  these  spillovers  is  inherently 
challenging — most crucially, individuals are not randomly assigned 
coworkers,  such  that  estimated  spillovers  could  reflect  selection  in 
which entrepreneurial workers happen to appear in the same work-
places  —  I  present  a  series  of  analyses  designed  to  strengthen  the 
causal interpretation. For example, I show in panel regressions with 
employer fixed effects that spillover estimates persist when consider-
ing within-employer variation in entrepreneurial coworkers over time. 
In cross-sectional regressions I show that spillovers are concentrated 
amongst  workers  at  the  same  establishment:  an  individual  is  sub-
stantially more likely to become an entrepreneur if their immediate 
coworkers have entrepreneurial experience than if workers at other
locations of the same firm have entrepreneurial experience. Further-
more, by considering an individual’s own history as an entrepreneur, I 
demonstrate that the estimated spillovers are not the result of recent 
entrepreneurs, who may become entrepreneurs again in the future, 
sorting to the same workplaces: the recent entrepreneurs are not more 
likely become entrepreneurs again in the future after working with 
entrepreneurial coworkers.

The second step of the paper addresses the ‘‘who’’, ‘‘when’’, and 
‘‘where’’  questions:  which  workers  learn  and  gain  inspiration  from 
entrepreneurial coworkers, and in which circumstances does this hap-
pen? While I find evidence that individuals do on average learn en-
trepreneurship from their coworkers and these spillovers occur broadly 
across sectors, these spillovers are concentrated amongst the tradition-
ally represented groups in entrepreneurship — White and Asian men 
— such that spillovers may actually perpetuate low entrepreneurship 
rates amongst minorities. This arises for two reasons. First, exposure 
to entrepreneurial coworkers is not equal across demographic groups, 
with  Blacks  working  with  significantly  lower  shares  of  former  en-
trepreneurs compared to Whites; Blacks are not working in the ‘‘right’’ 
firms in order to take advantage of learning opportunities. Second, 

3 As  discussed  below,  this  finding  is  consistent  with  several  papers  in 
the literature, most notably Nanda and Sørensen (2010); nonetheless, it is 
important  to  show  average  patterns  in  my  data  before  I  characterize  the 
spillovers.

3 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

conditional on exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers, spillovers occur 
mostly within demographic groups, if at all. Women appear to learn 
entrepreneurship only from their (uncommon) female entrepreneurial 
coworkers, and Blacks seemingly learn entrepreneurship from none of 
their coworkers, regardless of race. These two forces – unequal expo-
sure and lower rates of spillovers conditional on exposure – mean that 
minority entrepreneurship is unlikely to blossom through workplace 
connections; indeed, in back-of-the-envelope calculations, I find that 
equalizing spillovers across sexes and races would reduce the gender 
and racial gaps by 10% and 5%, respectively.

The  third  and  final  step  of  the  paper  addresses  the  ‘‘why’’  and 
‘‘how’’  questions:  when  entrepreneurial  learning  happens,  why  and 
how does it happen? The goal here is to understand whether former 
entrepreneurs are simply inspiring entrepreneurs or also teaching them 
skills that will generate more productive new businesses. I find that 
individuals who become entrepreneurs after working with relatively 
more entrepreneurial coworkers tend to start firms that are smaller 
in both employment and sales and are less likely to survive, meaning 
that the spillovers tend to generate mediocre firms. This is consistent 
with a net pattern of individuals on average simply being inspired or 
learning the institutional knowledge needed to start a firm, as this 
leads to less productive individuals choosing to become entrepreneurs. 
However, if the individuals’ entrepreneurial coworkers ran larger or 
longer-surviving firms, the individuals are more likely to start firms that 
are larger and more likely to survive. These results suggest scope for
some true productivity gains via entrepreneurial skill spillovers, if the 
spillovers are from particularly successful entrepreneurs. This scope is 
limited by the frank reality that most former entrepreneurs an individ-
ual gets to meet are not superstars. Finally, I find limited evidence of 
spillovers alleviating financial constraints; instead, I interpret spillovers 
as generally reducing information frictions.

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  1 
describes my contribution through the lens of the existing literature. 
Section 2 describes the U.S. Census Bureau data and samples used. The 
following three sections (Sections 3, 4, 5) take the three steps of the pa-
per, covering the ‘‘what’’, ‘‘who’’/‘‘when’’,/‘‘where’’ and ‘‘why’’/‘‘how’’ 
questions  of  learning  from  entrepreneurial  coworkers,  respectively. 
Section 6 concludes. A number of additional results are contained in 
an appendix available online.

1. Related literature

This paper builds upon a growing literature individuals on learning 
entrepreneurship from coworkers and communities, which generally 
document a potential presence of entrepreneurial spillovers but have 
limited findings on who is affected by the spillovers and no or mixed 
evidence on what is transmitted across spillovers. For example, Nanda 
and Sørensen (2010) study entrepreneurial spillovers across a small 
sample of coworkers in Denmark, finding evidence of positive extensive 
margin spillovers in support of learning, while Bosma et al. (2012) 
present survey evidence of former colleagues and employers serving as 
role models for entrepreneurship. Other work considers entrepreneurial 
spillovers in other contexts, including geographic communities (Gian-
netti and Simonov (2009) and Guiso et al. (2021)), families (Hvide and 
Oyer (2018), Akcigit et al. (2021), Lindquist et al. (2015), and Djankov 
et al. (2006)), MBA classrooms (Lerner and Malmendier (2013), Shue 
(2013), and Hacamo and Kleiner (2022)), and employers-employee re-
lationships (Klepper and Sleeper (2005), Gompers et al. (2005), Bosma 
et al. (2012), and Babina and Howell (2024)).

I  complement  this  literature  by  extensively  characterizing  en-
trepreneurial  spillovers  across  workers.  Using  large,  broad,  and 
high-quality data that allow me to study a wide span of the American 
workforce, I find evidence consistent with the basic story these papers 
tell:  nascent  entrepreneurs’  transition  into  entrepreneurship  can  be 
affected by their exposure to entrepreneurs. I provide new evidence 

M. Wallskog

characterizing these spillovers, both in terms of who is affected and
how the spillovers affect productivity.

My ability to study the nature of these spillovers stems from the 
size and scope of my data, as well as the high-quality demographic 
and firm success measures. For instance, Nanda and Sørensen (2010) 
do not characterize the spillovers beyond their existence, citing limita-
tions in their data, including a lack of firm performance information 
as  well  as  limited  ability  to  control  for  and  analyze  time-varying 
individual- and firm-level attributes. Similarly, the external validity 
of studies of very narrow settings such as Harvard MBA classrooms 
(Lerner and Malmendier (2013)) is unclear; meanwhile, by studying 
the average American workplace, I produce results that are relevant 
economy-wide.4

Finally, I provide insights on the importance of social networks for 
the literature of minority entrepreneurship and business leadership, 
which has largely focused on documenting disparities in resources such 
as financing (see, e.g., Ewens (2023)).5 My findings are particularly 
important for Black entrepreneurship, as I find that on average Blacks 
learn entrepreneurship from none of the entrepreneurial coworkers, re-
gardless of their race. This pattern complements recent survey evidence 
suggesting that Black prospective entrepreneurs deviate in their path 
towards launching their businesses when they infrequently discuss their 
business ideas with others (Bennett and Robinson (2024)).

2. Data

I  use  several  datasets  from  the  U.S.  Census  Bureau  to  measure 
the entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial outcomes for individuals and 
their coworkers.6 See Section A.1 for details on these datasets and how 
samples and variables are constructed. Here, I present broad summary 
statistics for the main sample.

2.1. Coworkers and firm and worker characteristics

I measure earnings, demographics, and firm information for individ-
uals and their coworkers using the Longitudinal Employer Household 
Dynamics (LEHD), which is the matched employer–employee data that 
covers the near-universe of formally employed workers in the United 
States. I use LEHD data from 1993 to 2013 for a balanced sample of 
18 states; for my main sample, I focus on individuals working in the 
middle of this time window (2004), for whom I can measure previous 
and future outcomes.7 The LEHD is constructed from firm-side state 
unemployment insurance (UI) records and contains information on em-
ployment, earnings, and demographics. The data contains longitudinal 
employer and individual identifiers that allow me to link individuals 
and their coworkers and follow workers over time as they change jobs.

4 In Section OA.7, I provide evidence to reconcile my findings with Lerner 
and  Malmendier  (2013)  by  narrowing  in  on  ‘‘like-Harvard  MBA’’  en-
trepreneurial coworkers.

5 My paper resonates with broader notions of female mentorship in busi-
ness; for example, Rocha and Van Praag (2020) document that female-founded 
startups in Denmark spawn female entrepreneurs.

6 Data is available to researchers on approved projects through the Fed-
eral Statistical Research Data Center (FSRDC) network (United States Census 
Bureau (2023)).

7 This results in a balanced panel of the following 18 states: AK, AZ, CA, 
CO, FL, ID, IL, IN, KS, LA, MD, MO MT, NC, OR, WA, WI, WY (other states only 
provide data starting in later years). In the 2004 Current Population Survey 
Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS ASEC), these 18 states account 
for 44% of age 20–64 national employment. I source CPS data from IPUMS 
(Flood et al. (2021)).

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

My main notion of an individual’s employer is the establishment at 
which they earn the most in a given year.8 An individual’s coworkers 
are all other individuals with the same employer in the same year. From 
the LEHD, I measure individuals’ firm-level earnings (which includes 
salaries, wages, bonuses, stock options, and other cash pay) and de-
mographics, including age, sex, race/ethnicity, education, and country 
of birth9; I also measure establishment and firm variables, including 
industry and sector (based on 6-digit NAICS codes) and employment 
(counting the individual and their coworkers).

2.2. Entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial outcomes

I  measure  entrepreneurship  for  individuals  and  their  coworkers 
using  the  LEHD,  which  I  supplement  with  firm  entry  information 
from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which tracks all U.S. 
firms with paid employees over time. While there are several ways 
of measuring entrepreneurship, I follow the recent literature and call 
an  individual  an  entrepreneur  if  they  are  a  top  three  earner  at  a 
new firm.10 This definition will not always capture individuals who 
found a firm; sometimes, founders take little or no salary in the early 
years as their firms grow. In these cases, this definition will instead 
capture likely leaders or managers of these firms. For this paper, I take 
this measure of entrepreneurship as indicating individuals who hold 
influential positions at young firms and likely gain ‘‘entrepreneurial’’ 
experience  in  doing  so.  We  can  think  of  these  individuals  as  firm 
leaders, managers, and sometimes founders; I parsimoniously call them 
entrepreneurs in this paper. For entrepreneurs, I measure a variety of 
outcomes for their new firms, including size and survival measured in 
the LEHD and revenue and revenue per worker in the LBD.

2.3. Summary statistics

In Table  1, I present entrepreneurial, demographic, job, and estab-
lishment characteristics of all individuals working in 2004 and of those 
who later become entrepreneurs between 2005 and 2009. Relative to 
the general population, future entrepreneurs tend to be young, male, 
educated, White and Asian, born outside the U.S., higher earning, and 
working at smaller, younger firms. They also tend to work with more 
entrepreneurial coworkers, which I explore more systematically in the 
remainder of the paper.

Despite the fact that future entrepreneurs are different from workers 
in general, they work and become entrepreneurs across the economy. 
As Fig.  2 shows, future entrepreneurs work in all industries in 2004 
and start firms in all industries, though they disproportionately work 
and start firms in construction, professional/scientific/technical ser-
vices (e.g., R&D and law and accounting services), and accommodation 
and food services, and less often appear in manufacturing and health, 
compared to the general workforce. Nearly half of future entrepreneurs 
start firms in the same sector as their 2004 establishment.

8 For  this  paper,  the  ‘‘establishment’’  is  the  least  aggregate  firm  unit 
available in the LEHD, i.e., a state-level unemployment insurance account 
(called a State Employer Identification Number, or SEIN). The ‘‘establishment’’ 
pools firm locations within a state-sector pair; for about half of workers, this 
establishment is a single location. I restrict my sample to workers aged 20–64 
with at least one establishment coworker. See Section A.1 for details.

9 Note that some demographic variables within the Census contain imputed 
values; throughout this paper I only use variation in non-imputed values, 
which are identified by imputation flags. In most analysis samples, I keep 
individuals with imputed values but control for the imputation; when studying 
heterogeneity in spillovers by sex and race, I restrict my analysis samples to 
individuals with non-imputed demographics.
10 I identify the three highest annual earners at a firm in the first year in 
which it employs workers, as measured in the LEHD, following Agarwal et al. 
(2016), Kerr and Kerr (2017), and Azoulay et al. (2018). Section A.1 provides 
tests of this definition.

4 

M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Fig. 2.  Entrepreneurial individuals work and start firms across the economy.
Note: This figure plots the distributions of sectors of 2004 primary firms for all individuals and for future (2005–2009) entrepreneurs, as well as the distribution of sectors in 
which the future entrepreneurs start firms.

3. ‘‘What’’:  What  is  the  role  of  coworkers  with  previous  en-
trepreneurship in generating new firms?

In this first part of the paper, I estimate the role of entrepreneurial 
coworkers in promoting entrepreneurship. There are a variety of rea-
sons why entrepreneurial coworkers could encourage — or even dis-
courage — entrepreneurship. For example, former entrepreneurs may 
inspire entrepreneurship by sharing happy memories, describing the 
logistics  of  starting  a  firm,  or  making  suggestions  on  nascent  en-
trepreneurs’ business ideas; alternatively, former entrepreneurs may 
recount the stresses of entrepreneurship and consequently discourage 
would-be entrepreneurs. In this section, I explore the simple existence
and direction of net spillovers; I turn to heterogeneity in Section 4 and 
mechanisms in Section 5.

3.1. Empirical strategy: Leverage variation in exposure to entrepreneurial 
coworkers

In  order  to  study  the  extensive  margin,  I  estimate  a  model  of 
entrepreneurship with rich controls that leverages cross-individual vari-
ation  in  exposure  to  entrepreneurial  coworkers.  Here  I  begin  with 
my main analysis that compares the entrepreneurship of individuals 
cross-sectionally; below, I argue that these results are robust to key 
identification concerns.

I find that if an individual interacts proportionally more with former 
entrepreneurs, then they are more likely to become an entrepreneur 
subsequently. To make this causal argument, I want to compare individ-
uals who are very similar, both in terms of their own demographics and 
entrepreneurship experience and their current firms, but who (perhaps 
randomly) have different exposure to entrepreneurial experience.

I estimate the following linear probability model: 

Future entrepreneurship𝑖,𝑛,𝑠 = 𝛼 + 𝛽Share of coworkers
 with entrepreneurship𝑖

(1)

+𝐗𝑖,𝑛,𝑠𝛿 + 𝜉𝑖,𝑛,𝑠,
where Future entrepreneurship𝑖,𝑛,𝑠 is an indicator equal to 1 if indi-
vidual  𝑖,  whose  2004  primary  establishment  belongs  to  industry  𝑛
(given by a 6-digit NAICS code) and is located in state 𝑠, becomes 
an  entrepreneur  within  the  next  5  years  (i.e.,  from  2005  through 

2009), and 0 otherwise.11 The key coefficient of interest is 𝛽 on the 
share of individual 𝑖’s 2004 primary establishment coworkers who were 
entrepreneurs within the past 5 years; the share is a proportion and lies 
between 0 and 1 and is calculated by counting the number of individual 
𝑖’s coworkers who were entrepreneurs (started a firm) between 1999 
and  2003,  excluding  those  who  are  current  entrepreneurs  in  2004, 
and then dividing this count by the total number of coworkers. This 
coefficient measures the relationship between having a larger share of 
coworkers in 2004 with recent entrepreneurship experience and the 
likelihood of becoming an entrepreneur in the near future.12, 13

The model also contains a vector of controls 𝐗𝑖,𝑛,𝑠 that are chosen 
to  bolster  a  causal  interpretation  of  𝛽  measuring  the  causal  effect 
of  exposure  to  entrepreneurial  coworkers  on  an  individual’s  future 
entrepreneurship. Intuitively, by including controls, I make a ‘‘selection 
on observables’’ argument: conditional on these controls, exposure to 
entrepreneurial coworkers is exogenous; below, I test this argument 
by quantifying several identification concerns. Here, I include controls 
that may correlate with both the outcome and exposure variables, such 

11 This indicator for being a future entrepreneur is zero if the individual 
either appears in my sample of states in 2005–2009 as a worker only (i.e., as 
a worker, but not as an entrepreneur) or does not appear in my sample of 
states (e.g., because they are unemployed, not in the labor force, or working 
in a state outside of my sample.).
12 I deliberately follow Nanda and Sørensen (2010) in choosing this specifi-
cation, in order to generate estimates comparable to theirs. In Table OA.1, I 
estimate positive spillovers from exposure to any entrepreneurial coworkers, 
particularly for smaller establishments where an individual may be more likely 
to run into a single particular employee. Individuals at establishments with 
fewer than 25 employees are 17.7% more likely to become entrepreneurs if 
they work with at least one entrepreneurial coworker, relative to the mean, 
while those at establishments with more than 100 employees are 10.9% more 
likely to become entrepreneurs if they have any entrepreneurial coworkers.
13 Note that there is potential for attenuation bias for the estimate of this 
coefficient due to misclassification error: due to the fact that I only observe 
a  subset  of  states,  I  may  incorrectly  say  that  some  truly  entrepreneurial 
coworkers did not have entrepreneurial experiences, if they were entrepreneurs 
in the past outside of my sample of states; similarly, I may incorrectly say 
that some truly entrepreneurial individuals do not become entrepreneurs in 
the future, if they become entrepreneurs outside my sample of states. See 
Section OA.1 for a discussion of the resulting attenuation bias.

5 

M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Table 2
Exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers predicts future entrepreneurship.

Dependent variable: Entrepreneur within next 5 years
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

x

0.035***
(0.001)

0.038***
(0.001)

0.039***
(0.001)

0.056***
(0.001)

  Share of coworkers w/ entrepreneurship
  Log employment
  Previous entrepreneurship
  Demographics, earnings
  State FE
  Industry FE
Standard errors in parentheses. * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Note: This table presents evidence of positive extensive margins spillovers. The five columns gradually build up model (1), 
slowly adding controls as demonstrated in the table footer.
Standard errors are robust and clustered at the establishment level.
N = 46,680,000. Mean of dependent variable: 0.031. Mean (std dev) of share of coworkers with entrepreneurship: 0.034 
(0.095).

0.025***
(0.001)

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

that excluding these controls would generate endogeneity (i.e., omitted 
variable bias).

I control for several variables that, as shown in Table  1, are corre-
lated with an individual’s future entrepreneurship. Namely, I control 
for individual 𝑖’s primary establishment’s log employment14 because 
future entrepreneurs tend to work at smaller establishments. Similarly, 
I control for individual 𝑖’s own entrepreneurial experience by including 
indicators for whether the individual was previously an entrepreneur 
between 1999 and 2003 and for whether the individual is currently 
an  entrepreneur  in  2004,  since  entrepreneurship  is  highly  serially 
correlated within individual. I control for individual 𝑖’s 2004 log an-
nual earnings at their primary firm, since future entrepreneurs tend 
to have higher earnings, perhaps because higher-paid individuals are 
more productive or have more access to start-up capital. Furthermore, 
I control for a vector of demographic controls, including age fixed 
effects and indicators for sex, race, four-bin education, and birth in the 
United States,15 because, compared to the general workforce, future 
entrepreneurs  tend  to  be  younger,  male,  more  educated,  White  or 
Asian, or born outside the U.S. Many of these variables may correlate 
with individual 𝑖’s exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers, making it 
important  to  control  for  them;  for  example,  workers  of  particular 
demographics (and consequently similar entrepreneurial proclivities) 
may cluster at certain firms.

Additionally, I control for detailed industry and state fixed effects 
based on the industry and location of their 2004 primary establishment. 
Controlling for industry fixed effects is important because entrepreneur-
ship rates vary dramatically by industry; for example, around 2004, 
many new firms entered the construction sector, perhaps due to boom-
ing  housing  demand  (Fig.   2).  Controlling  for  state  fixed  effects  is 
similarly important because there may be location-based policies that 
promote  both  future  entrepreneurship  and  past  entrepreneurship  of 
coworkers.

The model also includes an idiosyncratic draw, 𝜉𝑖,𝑛,𝑠. Note that the 
share of individual 𝑖’s coworkers who were previously entrepreneurs is 
correlated with that share for their coworkers themselves; treatment is 
effectively defined at the establishment level. For this reason, I estimate 
this model with standard errors clustered at the establishment level.

Before I present the estimates of this model, note that both the sign 
and magnitude of 𝛽 are not known ex-ante, such that both the sign 

and magnitude are empirical questions. That is, 𝛽 measures the linear 
prediction  of  having  more  entrepreneurial  coworkers  on  future  en-
trepreneurship, holding fixed the set of controls as specified. If we inter-
pret model (1) as estimating a causal entrepreneurial spillover, 𝛽 could 
be  positive  if  individuals  are  inspired  or  taught  by  entrepreneurial 
coworkers. Alternatively, 𝛽 could be negative if these entrepreneurial 
coworkers discourage entrepreneurship. These spillovers could be large 
or small in magnitude.

3.2. Main results: Entrepreneurial coworkers inspire new entrepreneurship

Table  2 present the point estimates from model (1) as controls are 
gradually added, showing that individuals who work with proportion-
ally entrepreneurial coworkers are more likely to become entrepreneurs 
in the future, regardless of the inclusion of controls. As more controls 
are added, this relationship decreases marginally but remains relatively 
stable.

In the full specification (column 5), the coefficient on the share of 
coworkers with entrepreneurial experience is 0.025. This implies that 
individuals who work with a one standard deviation (9.5 percentage 
points) higher share of entrepreneurial coworkers are 0.236 percentage 
points  more  likely  to  become  entrepreneurs  in  the  next  five  years, 
which maps into a 7.6% increase relative to the mean; this increase 
is comparable to the prior findings in the literature.16

To provide a simple evaluation of the size of these spillovers, I 
conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation to approximate how much 
the spillovers boosted aggregate entrepreneurship in 2004. I predict 
the number of ‘‘additional’’ future entrepreneurs that start firms in 
the presence of spillovers by multiplying the coefficient on the share 
with the mean share of coworkers with entrepreneurship experience 
(0.03356) and the number of individuals (46.68 million). This calcula-
tion yields a predicted additional 39,000 future entrepreneurs, which 
amounts to a 2.75% increase. This calculation, while inherently simple 
and based on partial equilibrium numbers, demonstrates that these 
spillovers can generate many new firms. The fact that the spillovers 
are not the main source of new firms is not surprising — many factors 
enter into an individual’s decision to become an entrepreneur, and the 
spillovers measured here represent how that decision may be spurred 
at a snapshot in time. Nonetheless, these spillovers demonstrate that 
there exists a large number of marginal, ‘‘nudgeable’’ individuals who 
may opt to become entrepreneurs.

14 In Table OA.2, I control for establishment employment more flexibly (by 
including either employment bin or employment level fixed effects) and find 
qualitatively similar results.
15 As  noted  above,  non-imputed  demographics  are  not  available  for  all 
individuals. In regressions below, I assign the mean demographic values to 
those  with  missing  demographics  and  then  include  as  controls  indicators 
for missing the various demographic values; a crucial exception appears in 
Section 5 when I study heterogeneity by sex and race, in which case I restrict 
the sample to individuals with non-imputed sex and race values.

16 In Denmark, Nanda and Sørensen (2010) find that a one standard devia-
tion in an individual’s coworkers’ entrepreneurship predicts a 4% increase in 
their future entrepreneurship, relative to the mean. In Italy, Guiso et al. (2021) 
find that a one standard deviation in an individual’s local firm density at age 
18 predicts an 8% increase in their entrepreneurship, relative to the mean. 
In Sweden, Giannetti and Simonov (2009) find that a one standard deviation 
increase in an individual’s local entrepreneurship predicts a 5.7% increase in 
their entrepreneurship, relative to the mean.

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Table 3
Exposure to entrepreneurial coworker robustly predicts future entrepreneurship.

  Robustness exercise:

Dependent Variable: Entrepreneur Within Next 5 Years
Add estab.
fixed effects
(1)

Vs. at firm’s
other estabs.
(3)

(2)

(4)

Vs. local
environment

Previous
entr.

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.014***
(0.001)

0.021***
(0.001)

0.042***
(0.001)

0.019***
(0.001)

0.013***
(0.001)

0.098***
(0.003)

0.092***
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.002)

  Share of coworkers w/ 
entrepreneurship
  Share of workers at
other estabs. w/ entr.
  Previous entr. × Share
of coworkers w/ entr.
  Establishment FE
  ZIP code-Ind FE
  Sample
  N (Millions)
24.03
  Mean(dep var)
0.019
  Mean(share cow w/ entr.)
0.014
  Std dev(share cow w/ entr.)
0.027
Standard errors in parentheses. * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Note: This table presents robustness checks of the positive extensive margins spillovers. All columns include model (1) controls (log 
employment, recent entrepreneurship, demographics, log earnings, and age, industry, and state fixed effects). Additional control are 
listed in the footer as well as: columns 1 and 2: year and firm age fixed effects; column 4: log employment at other establishments of 
the firm. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the establishment level. See Section 3.3 for details.

Main
46.68
0.031
0.034
0.095

24.03
0.019
0.014
0.027

20.20
0.044
0.055
0.131

20.20
0.044
0.055
0.131

92.82
0.032
0.034
0.095

92.82
0.032
0.034
0.095

−0.049***
(0.001)

’03-’04 Panel

Single-location

Multi-estabs.

x

x

3.3. Robustness

While I argue above that model (1) controls for important possible 
sources of endogeneity, there remains the possibility that other unob-
served or misspecified characteristics generate endogeneity problems. 
Most importantly, there remains the possibility that entrepreneurial 
individuals  cluster  at  particular  workplaces  or  that  workers  at  the 
same employers experience some common treatment that predicts en-
trepreneurship.17  In  other  words,  some  employers  may  simply  hire 
many previous and future entrepreneurs, or they may hire many pre-
vious entrepreneurs and additionally induce some of their workers to 
become entrepreneurs in the future.

In an ideal analysis, I would leverage some random shock to the 
coworkers an individual faces. In reality, these shocks are extremely 
difficult to capture.18 Instead, I present a series of robustness exercises 
in Section OA.3 aimed at reducing the endogeneity concern as well as 
survey-based evidence of spillovers in Section OA.4; no test is perfect, 
but they combine to reveal a robust pattern of spillovers.

Robustness  exercise  1:  Add  establishment  fixed  effects  in  a  panel.  In 
the  first  robustness  exercise,  I  move  away  from  the  cross-sectional 
analysis of model (1) in order to leverage variation in exposure to 
entrepreneurial coworkers within an establishment over time.

I estimate spillovers across coworkers in a panel version of my data, 
holding fixed the establishment. To do this, I extend my data into a 
panel by adding individuals in 2003 (in addition to those in 2004) and 
re-estimate model (1) with the inclusion of year and establishment fixed 
effects; because variation in establishments over time may confound 
firm life cycle effects, I additionally control for firm age fixed effects. 
Columns 1 and 2 of Table  3 present the results. Column 1 excludes 
establishment fixed effects and presents estimates comparable to those 
in column 5 of Table  2; in this panel sample, individuals working with 

17 In the language of the peer effects literature, these concerns amount to 
selection into peer groups and common shocks (see, e.g., Sacerdote (2014)). 
The third common concern in estimating peer effects, namely the reflection 
problem first described in Manski (1993), is not relevant in this paper due to 
the nonconcurrent nature of individuals’ and coworkers’ entrepreneurship.
18 One  potential  identification  source  could  be  the  unexpected  death 
(e.g., heart attack) of an entrepreneurial coworker (see, for example, Choi 
et al. (2019)). I do not consider this strategy both because I do not observe 
mortality  and  because  the  estimated  spillovers  are  concentrated  amongst 
younger workers (Figure OA.1), for whom there are likely fewer unexpected 
deaths.

a one standard deviation higher share of entrepreneurial coworkers are 
7.4% more likely to become entrepreneurs within the next 5 years, 
relative to the mean. Column 2 leverages variation within establish-
ments by adding establishment fixed effects, consequently accounting 
for (at least in part) selection into establishments that is fixed within the 
narrow time window. As the results show, there is a role for selection: 
the inclusion of the establishment fixed effects reduces the effect of 
spillovers by a little over a third. Yet, the spillovers I measure are not 
fully accounted for by selection into workplaces: controlling for this se-
lection, a one standard deviation increase in entrepreneurial coworkers 
predicts a 4.6% higher likelihood of becoming an entrepreneur, relative 
to the mean.19

There are two distinct limitations of this exercise. First, this panel 
study imposes a specific structure on timing of the spillovers. For exam-
ple, suppose an establishment has the exact same set of workers in 2003 
and 2004, with the exception of a new worker with entrepreneurial 
experience being hired in 2004; then, when I study the workers’ like-
lihoods of becoming entrepreneurs within the next five years, with 
establishment fixed effects, I am effectively testing whether they are 
more likely to become an entrepreneur in 2009 (five years after 2004, 
when they face an entrepreneurial coworker) than in 2004 (one year 
after 2003, when they do not face an entrepreneurial coworker) — all 
of the interim years (2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008) are contained in both 
‘‘within five years’’ measures.20 This comparison makes evaluating the 
reduction in the coefficient with establishment fixed effects difficult. 
While this mechanical oddity could be resolved by only considering 
future entrepreneurship within the next single year, that would also 
impose a tight timeline for spillovers.21 Because of these issues, my 
preferred specifications are cross-sectional.

19 One possible concern with this analysis is that establishments that newly 
hire  more  former  entrepreneurs  may  be  shifting  their  hiring  in  general, 
e.g., because they are starting a new project. In untabulated results, I restrict 
this analysis to individuals who joined their firm in 2002 or earlier; these in-
dividuals were not hired during the same time new entrepreneurial coworkers 
may have been hired. (I allow these individuals’ entrepreneurial coworkers to 
have joined after 2002.) I find similar results for this subsample, consistent 
with these within-establishment patterns not simply reflecting general hiring 
changes.
20 Note that the analysis in Table  3 does not actually require individuals to 
be at the same establishment in both years, such that in reality there is iden-
tifying variation coming both from individuals and coworkers joining and/or 
leaving their establishment in either year and the timing of entrepreneurship.

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Wallskog

Second, while adding establishment fixed effects in a panel may 
remove a fixed component of the role of an employer for pooling and/or 
encouraging entrepreneurs, there could be time-varying selection or 
employer treatment effects. For example, an employer’s propensity to 
hire entrepreneurial workers may depend on its situation; perhaps firms 
experiencing dramatic growth are more likely to become hubs for en-
trepreneurial individuals. If this is the case, employer fixed effects may 
miss this time-varying role for firms. Robustness exercise 2 considers 
this possibility.

Robustness exercise 2: Compare to other workers employed at other estab-
lishments of the same firm.  Given the limitations of the panel setting 
described above, I return to the 2004 cross-section to evaluate variation 
in entrepreneurial spillovers within a firm in the same year. Namely, 
I consider individuals at multi-establishment firms and analyze their 
future entrepreneurial behavior as a function of workers who work at 
the same firm in the same year but at different locations within the 
firm; assuming individuals at different locations do not interact on a 
regular basis, individuals should not be learning entrepreneurship from 
these workers. If individuals truly have no interactions across estab-
lishments, which is likely to be true in 2004 prior to the proliferation 
of video meeting software, I interpret any apparent spillovers across 
establishments as reflecting selection or firm effects.

Columns 3 and 4 of Table  3 present estimates of model (1) for 
the sample of multi-establishment firms. Column 3 presents the base-
line specification; for this sample, we see a larger coefficient on the 
share of coworkers (at one’s own establishment) with entrepreneurial 
experience of 0.098, which translates into a 14% increase in future 
entrepreneurship relative to the mean, for a one standard deviation 
increase in exposure. Column 4 compares the role of an individual’s 
same-establishment coworkers to workers at the same firm but other 
establishments;  I  add  as  a  covariate  the  share  of  workers  at  other 
establishments with recent entrepreneurship. We see some evidence of 
selection or firm effects: the coefficient on other-establishment workers 
is nonzero at 0.010. Yet, the coefficient on same-establishment cowork-
ers remains large (0.092), demonstrating that an individual’s future 
entrepreneurship is disproportionately related to their establishment 
coworkers’ past entrepreneurship, rather than to the entrepreneurial 
experience of other employees at the firm. In other words, even when 
considering workers who have all chosen to work at the same firm 
in the same year, the spillovers I estimate are concentrated within an 
individual’s workplace.22

Robustness  exercise  3:  Compare  to  local  entrepreneurship  environment. 
While the first two exercises support the idea that spillovers are concen-
trated within an establishment, within a particular year, there remains 
the possibility of ‘‘common shocks’’ beyond an employer. For exam-
ple,  the  local  entrepreneurial  environment  may  generate  swings  in 
entrepreneurship  that  generate  patterns  of  previous  and  future  en-
trepreneurs appearing at the same workplaces; this concern is partic-
ularly relevant as literature has shown that individuals may experience 
entrepreneurial  learning  from  their  broader  geographic  community 

21 In untabulated results, I show that exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers 
in 2004 does predict entrepreneurship in 2005, it also continues to predict 
(new)  entrepreneurship  in  2006,  2007,  2008,  and  2009,  suggesting  that 
restricting to the next year may needlessly restrict estimated spillovers.
22 One threat to this robustness exercise would entail different establish-
ments of the same firm exhibiting different selection or employer treatment 
effect patterns: perhaps a firm’s headquarters is always more entrepreneurial 
than its other locations. In Table OA.3 I find similar results when I restrict the 
comparison of same-establishment coworkers to workers at other similar estab-
lishments of the firm, where similarity is defined on the basis of location and 
sector. More broadly to consider the role of time-varying firm behavior, I show 
in Tables OA.4 and OA.5 that spillovers persist controlling for establishment 
employment growth and productivity and revenue, respectively.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

(Guiso et al. (2021), Giannetti and Simonov (2009)). To address this 
concern, I conduct a series of analyses controlling for an individual’s 
local environment.

Columns 5 and 6 of Table  3 present one such analysis. I consider 
single-location establishments in my main 2004 sample for which I can 
identify the establishment’s ZIP code and estimate model (1). Column 
5  presents  the  baseline  specification.  For  this  sample,  I  estimate  a 
coefficient on the share of coworkers with entrepreneurial experience 
of  0.013,  amounting  to  a  3.9%  increase  in  future  entrepreneurship 
relative to the mean, for a one standard deviation increase in exposure. 
Column 6 adds in ZIP code-by-industry fixed effects; doing this removes 
systematic differences in a local industry-specific entrepreneurship rate, 
such that I am comparing, for example, workers at two automobile 
dealers that sell new cars in north Durham, NC. Adding these fixed 
effects actually increases the estimated coefficient to 0.019, translating 
to a 5.7% increase in future entrepreneurship relative to the mean, 
for  a  one  standard  deviation  increase  in  exposure.  I  interpret  this 
result as reassurance the estimated spillovers are not wholly driven by 
individuals’ local environments beyond their workplace.23

Robustness  exercise  4:  Heterogeneity  by  individuals’  own  previous  en-
trepreneurship experience.  Despite the fact that the previous robustness 
exercises have supported a spillover interpretation of individuals learn-
ing  entrepreneurship  from  their  coworkers,  there  still  remains  the 
possibility of entrepreneurial workers clustering at particular establish-
ments in particular years for some reason unexplained by the local 
entrepreneurship environment. I consider this possibility by leveraging 
the fact that I observe previous entrepreneurship experience for poten-
tial future entrepreneurs. This allows me to consider whether the es-
timated spillovers are driven by observably entrepreneurial individuals 
happening to work with entrepreneurial coworkers.

Column  7  of  Table   3  presents  this  analysis.  For  my  main  2004 
sample, I extend model (1) to estimate how an individual’s own en-
trepreneurial  experience  (in  the  past  five  years)  interacts  with  ex-
posure to entrepreneurial coworkers in predicting entrepreneurship; 
recall that model (1) already controls for an individual’s own experi-
ence on its own. If the estimated spillovers in Table  2 reflect previ-
ous entrepreneurs simply happening to work alongside entrepreneurial 
coworkers, then individuals without entrepreneurial experience should 
have  zero  estimated  spillovers  (i.e.,  the  coefficient  on  the  share  of 
coworkers with entrepreneurial experience would be zero), with all 
spillovers loading onto the interaction term of the individual’s previ-
ous entrepreneurship experience and their exposure to entrepreneurial 
coworkers. Instead, we see the opposite: previous entrepreneurs expe-
rience, if anything, negative spillovers, with a small negative marginal 
effect (i.e., 0.042 + (−0.049) = −0.007). Consequently, the estimated 
spillovers are not wholly driven by observably entrepreneurial workers 
clustering in the same workplaces, conditional on controls.24

4. ‘‘Who’’, ‘‘when’’, and ‘‘where’’: Which workers learn and gain 
inspiration from entrepreneurial coworkers, and in which circum-
stances does this happen?

In this second step of the paper, I explore heterogeneity.

23 In  Section  OA.3,  I  discuss  other  common  shocks  and  show  that 
the  spillovers  are  not  driven  by  time-varying  local  business  cycle  factors 
(Table OA.6).
24 In Section OA.3, I follow Table 4 of Nanda and Sørensen (2010) and show 
that the timing of an individual’s entrepreneurship is predicted by exposure to 
entrepreneurial coworkers; this exercise amounts to person-level regressions 
with person fixed effects for individuals who ever become entrepreneurs and 
exhibits the timing issues present in the panel regressions with establishment 
fixed effects discussed above, such that it is an imperfect robustness exercise.

8 

M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Fig. 3.  Entrepreneurial spillovers vary by sector.
Note: This figure presents regression coefficient and 95% confidence interval estimates of an adapted version of model (1), performed on the sample of individuals in 2004, in 
which I estimate separate coefficients on share of coworkers with recent entrepreneurship experience by establishment sector.

4.1. Spillovers are common across sectors

Because workplaces and entrepreneurship patterns vary by industry, 
it  is  plausible  that  spillovers  may  vary  dramatically  across  sectors. 
Any differences across sectors could have implications for minority 
entrepreneurship: for example, if spillovers were wholly concentrated 
in high tech, venture capital-backed sectors where women and racial 
minorities are poorly represented (see e.g., Ewens (2023)), then we may 
not expect spillovers to generate many new minority entrepreneurs.

In  fact,  most  sectors  have  similar  coefficients  to  the  aggregate 
coefficient, with some exceptions. Fig.  3 shows the spillovers by the 
sector of the individual’s current establishment, estimated in a single 
regression by interacting the share of coworkers who were recently 
entrepreneurs  with  indicators  for  each  sector,  while  continuing  to 
include industry fixed effects that control for baseline differences in 
future entrepreneurship rates. There appears to be few spillovers for 
workers in the agriculture, utilities, and health sectors (which likely 
have high entry costs due to regulation) but substantial spillovers in 
the accommodation and food services sector.

The fact that spillovers exist in most sectors but are strongest in 
the accommodation and food service sector suggests three conclusions. 
First,  these  spillovers  exist  across  the  economy  —  these  spillovers 
are commonplace and are not driven by the culture or structure of 
particular sectors. Second, because the spillovers are largest in the rel-
atively low-technology accommodation and food services sectors, these 
spillovers  are  unlikely  to  be  predominantly  transmitting  knowledge 
of  complex  technologies,  promoting  high-tech  innovation,  or  help-
ing identify novel ideas or niche markets.25 Instead, spillovers may 

25 Beyond being common across sectors, spillovers also occur across the 
income distribution (Table OA.7).

be conveying information about the entrepreneurial lifestyle or the 
logistics  of  running  a  business;  for  example,  spillovers  in  the  food 
services sector may consist of individuals learning about how to find 
reliable workers or where to buy used kitchen equipment, given the 
importance of the market for used capital for young firms (Ma et al. 
(2022)).  This  idea  is  further  supported  by  findings  in  Table  OA.8 
(discussed in detail in Section OA.6), in which I find that individuals 
are particularly likely to start a business in the accommodation and 
food  services  sector  (conditional  on  starting  any  business)  if  their 
entrepreneurial coworkers ran businesses in that sector; in other words, 
former restaurateurs may explain the logistics of the restaurant sector, 
thus  prompting  new  restaurant  entrepreneurship.  Section  5  further 
explores these mechanisms. Finally, given how common these spillovers 
are, they could meaningfully increase minority entrepreneurship, which 
I explore below.

4.2. Spillovers perpetuate low entrepreneurial diversity

In my main sample, only 41% of entrepreneurs are women, despite 
women  making  up  47%  of  the  workforce;  meanwhile,  only  5%  of 
entrepreneurs are Black despite Blacks representing 10% of the work-
force (Table  1). These gender and racial gaps are common concerns of 
policymakers looking to promote minority entrepreneurship. Do these 
spillovers  increase  entrepreneurial  diversity  by  giving  access  to  en-
trepreneurship to more underrepresented minorities? The spillovers are 
commonplace and have the potential to affect people of different back-
grounds and resources, as most workers have coworkers. This contrasts 
with other forces behind entrepreneurship, such as having wealthy or 
entrepreneurial parents or having access to higher education. Hence, 
these spillovers could encourage greater diversity in entrepreneurship. 
However,  the  scope  for  this  possibility  is  limited  for  two  reasons, 
discussed in turn: differential exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers 

9 

M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Table 4
Exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers varies by demographic group.

Sex

Men
(1)

Women
(2)

Race

White
(3)

0.034

  Mean share of coworkers w/ entrepreneurship
  Gap relative to majority group (men or Whites)
  Gap relative to majority group, residualized
against industry and state
  N (Millions)
3.71
21.89
  Share entrepreneur 2005–2009
0.014  
0.035
Note: This table demonstrates that exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers varies by demographic group. The first row presents 
the average share of coworkers with entrepreneurial experience, by demographic group. The second row presents the gap 
between demographic groups (i.e., average share for women minus men in columns 1 and 2; average share for non-Hispanic 
Blacks minus non-Hispanic Whites in columns 3 and 4). The third row presents the similar gaps with exposure residualized 
against industry (NAICS6) and state fixed effects in order to account for worker sorting across industry and geography.

0.033
−0.001
0.001

24.80
0.027

26.58
0.033

0.035

Black  
(4)
0.020  
−0.015 
−0.007 

and differential effects of spillovers. I find substantial demographic gaps 
in both of these spaces, such that these spillovers may actually reinforce 
the gender and racial entrepreneurship gaps.

Exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers.  First, exposure to entrepreneurial 
coworkers is not equally distributed. Table  4 compares exposure to 
entrepreneurial coworkers by demographic group, both presenting gaps 
in raw means and means after residualizing against state and indus-
try fixed effects. The latter tests how entrepreneurship and exposure 
vary by demographic group, accounting for selection into states and 
industries.

Columns 1 and 2 demonstrate that men and women on average 
have similar exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers: on average, 3.4% 
of men’s coworkers have recent entrepreneurial experience, while 3.3% 
of women’s coworkers have recent entrepreneurial experience.  This 
gap flips when I residualize against state and industry fixed effects 
— i.e., women have slightly lower exposure on average because they 
sort into states and/or industries where there are fewer previous en-
trepreneurs as potential coworkers.

I see starker differences when I compare (non-Hispanic) White and 
(non-Hispanic) Black individuals in columns 3 and 4. On average, only 
2% of Black workers’ coworkers have recent entrepreneurial experi-
ence, while 3.5% of White workers’ coworkers were entrepreneurs. This 
gap is halved when I residualize against state and industry fixed effects 
but remains large: even in the same narrow industry and state, Black 
workers have lower exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers. This means 
they have fewer learning opportunities.

Size  of  spillovers.  Second,  conditional  on  having  access  to
entrepreneurial coworkers, the spillovers do not operate equally for all 
demographic groups. I expand model (1) to study in turn how spillovers 
vary based on sex and race; I interact the exposure variable with the in-
dividual’s demographics (e.g., sex) and additionally consider the special 
role of exposure to entrepreneurial coworkers belonging to particular 
demographic groups (e.g., female entrepreneurial coworkers).

I find stark differences in spillovers across sex and race, as shown 
in panels A and B of Table  5, respectively. Panel A shows that women 
seem to experience spillovers only if their entrepreneurial coworkers 
are also women, which is relatively rare. As shown in column 1, women 
are marginally less likely to become entrepreneurs after working with 
more entrepreneurial coworkers in general. But, as shown in column 
2, this is at least partially offset if those entrepreneurial coworkers 
are also women. Conditional on the share of her coworkers who were 
recently entrepreneurs, a woman with a one standard deviation (5.8 
percentage points) higher share of coworkers who were recently en-
trepreneurs and who are women is 0.31 percentage points marginally 
more likely to become an entrepreneur, 10.0% of the mean outcome. 
Men also seem to experience spillovers disproportionately from their 
male entrepreneurial colleagues, suggesting that spillovers are predom-
inantly occurring between coworkers of the same sex. This suggests that 
female entrepreneurship can be boosted by entrepreneurial learning 

from  coworkers  if   those  coworkers  are  also  women.  Crucially,  this 
is  often  not  the  case  —  while  on  average  3.4%  of  all  coworkers 
have recent entrepreneurial experience, only 1.3% of coworkers have 
entrepreneurial experience and are women, on average. 

When we turn to race, we see even starker results: Black workers 
actually seem to experience negative spillovers, regardless of whether 
their entrepreneurial coworkers are also Black. As column 1 of Panel B 
shows, Blacks are less likely to become entrepreneurs if they work with 
more entrepreneurial coworkers. Furthermore, these individuals are not 
more likely to become entrepreneurs when they work with more en-
trepreneurial coworkers who are also Black (column 2); unlike women, 
Black individuals do not experience in-group spillovers on average. 
This is not simply driven by a lack of Black entrepreneurial coworkers 
teaching entrepreneurial lessons: non-Black individuals do appear to 
learn from their Black entrepreneurial coworkers. Somehow these same 
lessons are not equally taught (or are available) to Black individuals. 
Importantly, even if Blacks were learning from Black entrepreneurial 
coworkers like women learn from female entrepreneurial coworkers, 
the scope of these spillovers would be highly limited by the lack of 
Black entrepreneurial coworkers: on average, only 0.1% of coworkers 
have recent entrepreneurial experience and are Black.

There are a variety of reasons for why estimated spillovers may vary 
by demographic group. For example, even within a workplace, indi-
viduals of different demographics may have different interactions with 
coworkers; I do not directly observe who actually interacts within an es-
tablishment, and perhaps some individuals are precluded from relation-
ships with entrepreneurial coworkers due to differences in occupations 
or tasks.26

There  are  also  reasons  why  spillovers  may  be  stronger  within 
groups. In addition to potentially forming the basis of social or mentor 
relationships, demographics may also change the type of information 
that is conveyed in the spillovers. For example, female entrepreneurs 
may  have  suggestions  for  navigating  the  male-dominated  sphere  of 
entrepreneurship. The scope for homophilic mentorships for women 
is  particularly  large,  given  the  literature  on  female  mentorship  in 
entrepreneurship and business.27 But not all demographic groups nec-
essarily experience mentorship in entrepreneurship, even within de-
mographic  groups:  Bennett  and  Robinson  (2024)  find  survey-based 
evidence that Black prospective entrepreneurs socialize their business 
ideas less than others, consistent with the patterns I observe.

26 In Table OA.9, I estimate model (1) but interact the exposure variable 
with  whether  the  coworkers  are  in  the  same  within-establishment  2004 
earnings quartile as the individual and find that spillovers are largest amongst 
individuals with similar earnings.
27 See, for example, Bosma et al. (2012), Field et al. (2016), Rocha and 
Van Praag (2020), Hampole et al. (2024), and Mertz et al. (2024).

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Table 5
Spillovers largely occur within-demographic group, if at all.

  Panel A: Women learn from women, men learn from men
  Share of coworkers with entrepreneurship
  1{Woman} × 
Share of coworkers with entrepreneurship
  Share of coworkers with entr. and who are women
  1{Woman} × 
Share of coworkers with entr. and who are women
  N (Millions)
  Mean(dep var) for men
  Mean(dep var) for women
  Panel B: Blacks do not learn from anyone
  Share of coworkers with entrepreneurship

Dep Var: Entrepreneur 2005–2009
(1)

(2)

0.035***
(0.001)
−0.020***
(0.001)

46.68
0.035
0.027

0.047***
(0.001)
−0.041***
(0.001)
−0.037***
(0.002)
0.054***
(0.002)

46.68
0.035
0.027

0.022***
(0.001)
−0.028***
(0.002)

0.021***
(0.001)
−0.026***
(0.003)
0.022***
(0.005)
−0.023***
(0.007)

  1{Black} × 
Share of coworkers with entrepreneurship
  Share of coworkers with entr. and who are Blacks
  1{Black} × 
Share of coworkers with entr. and who are Blacks
  N (Millions)
  Mean(dep var) for Whites
  Mean(dep var) for Blacks
Standard errors in parentheses. * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Note: This table explores heterogeneity in spillovers by demographic group. All columns include model (1) controls (log 
employment, recent entrepreneurship, demographics, log earnings, and age, industry, and state fixed effects). Column 2 controls 
for the share of coworkers in the relevant group (e.g., women) as well as the interaction between the group and that share 
(e.g., woman × share of coworkers who are women). See Section 4.2 for details.
Mean (std dev) of share of coworkers with entrepreneurship: 0.034 (0.095); share of coworkers with entrepreneurship and 
who are women: 0.013 (0.058); share of coworkers with entrepreneurship and who are Black: 0.001 (0.013).

36.37
0.033
0.014

36.37
0.033
0.014

Table 6
Back-of-the-envelope: Spillovers perpetuate low entrepreneurial diversity.

Actual

Counteractuals

No
spillovers
(2)

Same
exposure
(3)

Same size
of spillover
(4)

Same exposure
and size
(5)

(1)

′

s

s

)

′
Men

0.204

0.0345
0.0275

0.0345
0.0282

0.0345
0.0281

0.0345
0.0275

0.0333
0.0270

0.204
−0.2%

0.190
−6.9%

  Panel A: Spillovers exacerbate gender gaps
  Men’s rate
  Women’s rate
  Gap (1 − Women
  Change in gap
  Panel B: Spillovers exacerbate racial gaps
  Whites’ rate
  Blacks’ rate
  Gap (1 − Blacks
′ )
  Change in gap
Note: This table characterizes how spillovers affect gender and racial gaps. Column 1 presents actual 2005–2009 entrepreneur-
ship rates and gaps. Columns 2-5 present counterfactuals based on Tables Tables  4 and 5: column 2 removes all spillovers; 
column 3 assumes that women (Blacks) have the same exposure as men (Whites); column 4 assumes that women (Blacks) 
have the same size of spillover (i.e., coefficient) as men (Whites); column 5 assumes the same exposure and size. In both 
panels, the final row shows how the gap changes in each counterfactual, relative to the actual gap. See Section 4.2 for details.

0.184
−10.1%

0.556
−2.4%

0.553
−3.0%

0.543
−4.7%

0.185
−9.6%

0.0324
0.0144

0.0331
0.0142

0.0331
0.0148

0.0331
0.0151

0.0331
0.0142

0.573

0.570

0.5%

Whites

′

Quantifying the role of spillovers.  Given unequal spillover experiences, 
how much do these differences actually affect gender and racial en-
trepreneurial  gaps?  I  address  this  question  through  a  set  of  simple 
back-of-the-envelope calculations, shown in Table  6. 

In Panel A, I show how spillovers exacerbate gender gaps. Given an 
observed gender gap of 20.4% (i.e., women are 20.4% less frequently 
entrepreneurs, compared to men), I consider several counterfactuals. 
First, I consider the world in which there are no spillovers; this amounts 
to ‘‘removing’’ the additional entrepreneurs born out of the spillovers.28 
In the absence of spillovers, the gender gap falls by 6.9% (column 2). If 

instead of removing spillovers I equalize the spillover experience across 
men and women, the gender gap falls even more: if women had the 
same exposure to and learning from their entrepreneurial coworkers, 
the  gender  gap  would  fall  by  10.1%  (column  5).  This  is  primarily 
driven by equalizing the extent of learning (column 4), consistent with 
the pattern from Table  4 that women and men face similar shares of 
entrepreneurial coworkers.

In Panel B, I turn to racial gaps. From an observed racial gap of 
57.0% (i.e., Blacks are 57.0% less frequently entrepreneurs, relative to 

28 I.e.,  I  subtract  from  the  actual  number  of  entrepreneurs  the  product 
(mean exposure × coefficient × number of individuals), which captures the 

implied number of additional entrepreneurs based on the average exposure 
and predicted entrepreneurship from Table  5.

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Wallskog

Whites), removing all spillovers would reduce the racial gap by 2.4% 
(column 2).29 Since Blacks actually experience negative spillovers (Ta-
ble  5), simply equalizing Blacks’ and Whites’ exposure to entrepreneurs 
is insufficient to reduce the racial gap (column 3). Instead, having 
Blacks learn entrepreneurship as Whites experience on average can 
reduce  racial  gaps:  having  Blacks  and  Whites  experience  spillovers 
equally would reduce the racial gap by 4.7%.

Taken together, these sets of calculations, while inherently simple, 
highlight that the presence of unequal spillovers across sexes and races 
can have substantial impacts on diversity in entrepreneurship.

4.3. Other circumstances that affect the strength of spillovers

In  this  section,  I  briefly  describe  other  circumstances  in  which 
learning from entrepreneurial coworkers is stronger, which may further 
shed light on the nature of these spillovers and how they play out 
unequally across individuals; Section OA.6 provides details.

Spillovers  are  stronger  if  coworkers  were  relatively  successful.  Because 
entrepreneurial experience can vary vastly in terms of success, and thus 
likely enjoyability, it is possible that these extensive margin spillovers 
may vary by the characteristics of the coworkers’ past entrepreneurial 
firms.  Indeed,  I  find  that  the  positive  spillovers  are  generally  am-
plified when the entrepreneurial coworkers ran relatively successful 
firms. As shown in Table OA.10, conditional on general exposure to 
entrepreneurial coworkers, individuals who work with more successful
entrepreneurs  are  even  more  likely  to  become  entrepreneurs  them-
selves. That said, even relatively unsuccessful entrepreneurial cowork-
ers  encourage  entrepreneurship,  perhaps  because  they  still  enjoyed 
their entrepreneurship experiences or still learned useful lessons they 
can pass on to others.

Spillovers  are  stronger  for  less  experienced  workers.  Entrepreneurial 
coworkers likely have the strongest capacity to inspire entrepreneur-
ship  for  individuals  with  limited  experience,  i.e.,  for  whom  any 
lessons about entrepreneurship might be new. For example, spillovers 
are  strongest  for  younger  workers,  who  generally  learn  from  their 
slightly  older  (but  still  relatively  young)  coworkers,  who  might  be 
their supervisors or mentors (Figure OA.1 and Table OA.11). Similarly, 
as discussed in Section 3, spillovers are only relevant for individuals 
who  do  not  already  have  entrepreneurial  experience  themselves: 
individuals with recent entrepreneurial experience themselves have, 
if  anything,  negative  extensive  margin  spillovers  (Table  OA.11), 
consistent with previous entrepreneurs have little to learn from the 
average entrepreneurial coworkers. This aligns with survey evidence 
from Bosma et al. (2012), who find that experienced entrepreneurs are 
less likely to report using role models than new entrepreneurs.

5. ‘‘Why’’ and ‘‘how’’: When entrepreneurial learning happens, 
why and how does it happen?

In this third and final part of the paper, I explore mechanisms.
In  order  to  characterize  why  entrepreneurial  spillovers  occur,  I 
leverage information on firm outcomes. The idea here is to compare 
how individuals’ entrepreneurial successes vary with their past expo-
sure to entrepreneurial coworkers. I hypothesize that if entrepreneurial 
coworkers simply inspire others or teach basic institutional knowledge 
(e.g., the logistic steps of starting a company), this effectively lowers 
the entry cost or barrier to entrepreneurship such that ex ante lower 
productivity entrepreneurs should decide to start firms. In this case, I 
expect the marginal entrepreneur born out of learning from coworkers 
to have worse outcomes. Alternatively, if entrepreneurial coworkers 

29 Note that for this exercise, I assume Whites experience the spillovers 
estimated for non-Blacks in Table  5. In the sample in Table  5 Panel B, Whites 
comprise 81.4% of the non-Black population.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

give advice or provide networks that meaningfully increase the pro-
ductivity of nascent entrepreneurs, I expect the marginal entrepreneur 
born out of learning from coworkers to have better outcomes.30

Below,  I  tease  out  these  two  potential  channels  by  considering 
how general entrepreneurial coworkers versus relatively successful en-
trepreneurial coworkers predict future outcomes. I posit that if  there is 
scope for spillovers to increase productivity, it is likely to occur when 
individuals meet relatively successful entrepreneurial coworkers, who 
may have entrepreneurial skills to pass on. Average coworkers may be 
more likely to simply convey happy stories of entrepreneurship; in fact, 
the average entrepreneurial coworker was — by virtue of now being 
a coworker — a mediocre entrepreneur.31 These coworkers were far 
from superstars and so are unlikely to convey secrets to becoming a 
productive firm that they did not manage to enact themselves.

5.1. Empirical strategy: Leverage variation in exposure to successful en-
trepreneurs

I estimate an OLS specification with rich controls that leverages 
cross-individual  variation  in  exposure  to  entrepreneurial  coworkers 
and to entrepreneurial coworkers with different entrepreneurial firm 
characteristics. This estimation is restricted to the set of individuals 
who become entrepreneurs in the near future.

For future entrepreneurs, I estimate models of the form 

Future entrepreneurial outcome𝑖,𝑛,𝑠 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1Share of coworkers with entr.𝑖

+𝛽2Share of coworkers with entr.
& firm outcome𝑖
+𝐗𝑖,𝑛,𝑠𝛿 + 𝜉𝑖,𝑛,𝑠,

(2)

which is identical to model (1) except that now the outcome is some 
outcome for the firm that individual 𝑖 starts in the next five years, 
such as the productivity or size of the firm. I include an additional ex-
planatory variable: the share of individual 𝑖’s coworkers who were both 
entrepreneurs within in the past five years and whose entrepreneurial 
firm had some outcome (e.g., survived to a second year or was partic-
ularly large or productive). In some estimates of the model, I include 
entrepreneurial firm industry fixed effects in order to test whether more 
exposed individuals simply tend to start firms in, e.g., less productive 
industries.

5.2. Main results: Mixed intensive margin spillovers

Estimates  from  the  above  empirical  strategy  present  a  nuanced 
picture. Individuals who work with more entrepreneurial coworkers 
tend to start firms that are shorter-surviving and smaller and tend to 
earn less as entrepreneurs. However, if these entrepreneurial coworkers 
themselves ran longer-surviving, larger, and/or more productive, these 
patterns (at least partially) reverse.

I estimate model (2) for several metrics of how ‘‘successful’’ en-
trepreneurs  are  for  the  2004  sample;  Tables   7 and 8  present  the 
main  results.  I  begin  in  columns  1–4  of  Table   7  by  considering  a 
simple measure of firm success: survival, i.e., continued employment 

30 See  Section  OA.2  for  a  detailed  conceptual  framework.  Section  OA.5 
presents additional evidence against several alternative mechanisms, including 
entrepreneurial coworkers taking individuals along with them for their next 
venture,  teaching  generic  leadership  skills,  or  providing  direct  funding  or 
access to financial networks.
31 As Table OA.12 shows, average entrepreneurial coworkers look marginally 
worse compared to all entrepreneurs in terms of their firms’ survival, em-
ployment,  payroll,  revenue,  and  revenue  per  worker.  Note  that  these  are 
imperfect measures of success, and entrepreneurs of ‘‘failed’’ firms need not 
be  discouraged  from  entrepreneurship  themselves,  and  consequently  they 
need not discourage others. As Dillon and Stanton (2017) document, serial 
entrepreneurs frequently ‘‘dip in and out’’ of standard wage work.

12 

M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Table 7
New firms mimic entrepreneurial coworkers’ firms in success.

Dependent Variable: 2005–2009 Entrepreneurial Firm Outcome
Survive to age 2
(2)
(1)

Survive to age 5
(4)
(3)

Entry year log emp
(5)

(6)

Emp in top 10%
(8)
(7)
−0.106*** 
(0.002)

−0.088***
(0.002)

0.031***
(0.011)

−0.010***
(0.003)

−0.039***
(0.011)

−0.441***
(0.007)

−0.381***
(0.007)

−0.057***
(0.005)

−0.034***
(0.003)

  Share of coworkers with
entrepreneurship
  Additional effects:
  Share of coworkers with entr.
whose firm survived to age 2
  Share of coworkers with entr.
whose firm survived to age 5
  Share of coworkers with entr.
whose firm was in top 10% emp
  Mean(dep var)
  Mean(share with entr. in add. effects)
  Std dev(share with entr. in add. effects)
Standard errors in parentheses. * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Note: This table presents estimates of model (2) for individuals who become entrepreneurs between 2005 and 2009 for different measures of firm survival. 
All columns include model (1) controls (log employment, recent entrepreneurship, demographics, log earnings, and age, industry, and state fixed effects). 
Standard errors are robust and clustered at the establishment level. N = 1,456,000. Mean (std dev) of the share of coworkers with entrepreneurship is 
0.064 (0.147). See Tables OA.14 and OA.15 for robustness to the inclusion of entrepreneurial industry and entry year fixed effects. See Section 5 for 
details.

0.334***  
(0.011)

0.036***
(0.006)

1.104***
(0.029)

0.536
0.038
0.118

1.928
0.009
0.038

0.168
0.009
0.038

0.815
0.057
0.143

0.536

1.928

0.168

0.815

Table 8
Entrepreneurs’ wages mimic entrepreneurial coworkers’ firms in success.

Dependent Variable: Entry Year
Log(Earnings) as Entrepreneur 2005–2009
(2)
(1)

(3)

(4)
−0.178*** 
(0.007)

−0.184***
(0.007)

−0.160***
(0.007)

−0.164***
(0.007)

  Share of coworkers with
entrepreneurship
  Additional effects:
  Share of coworkers with entr.
whose firm was in top 10% emp
  Entrepreneurial industry-Entry year FE
x
Standard errors in parentheses. * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Note: This table presents estimates of model (2) for the wage and salary income of individuals who become 
entrepreneurs between 2005 and 2009, in their first year as entrepreneurs. All columns include model (1) controls 
(log employment, recent entrepreneurship, demographics, log earnings, and age, industry, and state fixed effects); 
even columns include entrepreneurial industry-by-entry year fixed effects. Standard errors are robust and clustered 
at the establishment level. N = 1,456,000. Mean of dep var is 9.832. Mean (std dev) of share is 0.064 (0.147). Mean 
(std dev) of share top 10% is 0.009 (0.038). See Section 5 for details.

0.339***  
(0.026)

0.357***
(0.026)

x

of workers. Do future entrepreneurs start longer-surviving firms if they 
worked  with  more  entrepreneurial  coworkers,  especially  those  who 
started  longer-surviving  firms?  As  columns  1  and  3  show,  general 
exposure  to  more  former  entrepreneurs  is  associated  with  a  lower 
likelihood of firm survival to both a second and fifth year, although 
the  coefficient  is  economically  small:  for  example,  a  one  standard 
increase in entrepreneurial coworkers predicts a 0.17% decrease in the 
likelihood of surviving a second year, relative to the mean. However, 
exposure to former entrepreneurs whose own firms survived after entry 
is associated with a higher likelihood of starting a firm that survives 
after entry, as shown in columns 2 and 4, though this generally does 
not fully offset the negative effect from general exposure.32

Beyond  firm  survival,  I  explore  other  measures  of  firm  success, 
including  size,  in  terms  of  employment,  payroll,  revenue,  and  rev-
enue productivity. As shown in Table  7 (and Table OA.14), the pat-
terns are generally similar to those for firm survival: individuals who 

32 Table  OA.13  shows  that  these  results  are  robust  to  the  inclusion  of 
entrepreneurial firm industry and entry year fixed effects as well as controls for 
the individuals’ 2004 firms’ productivity, such that the patterns are not driven 
by more exposed entrepreneurs entering particular sectors or in particular 
years nor by successful entrepreneurial coworkers being found at successful 
firms. Note that positive marginal effect of successful entrepreneurial cowork-
ers may be downward biased by the fact that these successful entrepreneurial 
coworkers may have joined the 2004 firms more recently, such that individuals 
may have fewer interactions with them.

work  with  more  entrepreneurs  tend  to  start  ‘‘worse’’  firms,  unless 
their entrepreneurial coworkers themselves were successful. For ex-
ample, in column 5 of Table  7, I find that a one standard deviation 
(14.7 percentage point) increase in the share of coworkers who were 
recently entrepreneurs predicts 5.5% lower entry year employment. 
Yet,  as  column  6  shows,  this  relationship  turns  positive  if  the  en-
trepreneurial coworkers ran large firms: conditional on general expo-
sure to entrepreneurial coworkers, a one standard deviation increase in 
entrepreneurial coworkers whose firms were in the top 10% of entry 
year employment (relative to firms in the same year and industry) 
predicts 4.3% higher entry year employment.

Columns 7 and 8 show similar patterns for the likelihood of a future 
entrepreneur’s firm being in the top 10% of entry year employment, 
relative  to  firms  that  enter  in  the  same  year  and  industry.  These 
specifications measure whether a future entrepreneur’s prospects of 
being a ‘‘top’’ entrepreneur depend on whether their entrepreneurial 
lessons came from ‘‘top’’ former entrepreneurs. Table OA.14 presents 
analogous specifications for entry year payroll, revenue, and revenue 
per worker, and demonstrates that the results are robust to the inclusion 
of entrepreneurial firm industry fixed effects. Regardless of firm out-
come, individuals are more likely to become successful as entrepreneurs 
in the future if their coworkers ran relatively successful firms.33

33 In untabulated results, I show that these patterns hold too for female and 
Black entrepreneurs.

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Wallskog

Finally,  I  consider  the  (labor  market)  earnings  of  entrepreneurs 
themselves. Consistent with having less success on average, individ-
uals  exposed  to  more  entrepreneurial  corkers  also  earn  lower  pay 
as entrepreneurs compared to other new entrepreneurs, as shown in 
Table  8, regardless of their entry year or industry. A one standard 
deviation (14.7 percentage point) increase in the share of coworkers 
who were entrepreneurs predicts that a future entrepreneur’s entry year 
earnings will be 2.3% lower. Consistent with the previous results, future 
entrepreneurs who work with more successful entrepreneurs are more 
likely to have higher earnings, conditional on their general exposure.

Taken together, these results suggest that average entrepreneurial 
coworkers are simply inspiring or teaching basic information to nascent 
entrepreneurs, which in turn allows less productive entrepreneurs to 
choose to enter. It may be tempting to conclude that these individuals 
are  making  sub-optimal  decisions  by  becoming  entrepreneurs,  with 
their entrepreneurial coworkers are ‘‘leading them astray’’, such that 
they  would  be  better  off  without  spillovers.  However,  it  is  worth 
remembering that individuals may receive non-pecuniary benefits from 
entrepreneurship, and some individuals may judge the success of their 
ventures by different metrics. Furthermore, the fact that relatively suc-
cessful entrepreneurial coworkers prompt successful entrepreneurship 
suggests that some of these spillovers translate into productivity, and 
consequently earnings, gains. This means that when women and Black 
would-be entrepreneurs do not experience spillovers, they may miss out 
opportunities to earn more.

Additional outcomes.  In Section OA.6, I explore additional outcomes 
to further characterize entrepreneurial spillovers. I find that exposure 
does not predict a higher likelihood of extreme success, as measured 
by making an initial public offering (IPO). Furthermore, exposed indi-
viduals tend to start firms that are less innovative, generating fewer 
patents, copyrights, and trademarks. In some cases, entrepreneurs are 
more likely to start firms in the sectors in which their entrepreneurial 
coworkers ran firms, consistent with entrepreneurial coworkers trans-
mitting sector-specific knowledge or connecting individuals with pro-
duction or sales networks in a particular industry. Finally, I find that 
these firms of more exposed individuals tend to have less within-firm 
earnings inequality, operate with less structured management practices, 
are more often financed by the owners instead of by banks or other in-
vestors, and are less likely to be family-owned (i.e., not have financing 
from family members).

Taken together, these additional outcomes highlight that, for the 
majority of individuals, these spillovers provide a pathway from regular 
work to entrepreneurship without conveying advanced skills or other 
tools for success. Generally faced with relatively unsuccessful former 
entrepreneurs, individuals are learning simple lessons, such as the basic 
logistics of starting a firm or the benefits of being your own boss. These 
coworkers are not generally teaching lessons on management practices, 
how to source financial capital, or the road to being a superstar.

6. Conclusion

Workplace social connections affect the landscape of entrepreneur-
ship. By bringing together individuals with different experiences, work-
places can serve as hubs for new entrepreneurship. Indeed, individ-
uals  who  work  with  more  entrepreneurial  coworkers  appear  to  be 
inspired by those coworkers and start firms of their own. While what
they are learning in these relationships is difficult to pin down pre-
cisely, patterns about firms’ success suggest that what individuals learn 
from their entrepreneurial coworkers depends on what those coworkers 
have to teach. The relatively successful entrepreneurs possess teach-
able skills that may improve future firms’ productivity, while the less 
successful entrepreneurs may still have institutional knowledge that 
reduces  the  entry  cost  to  entrepreneurship  without  improving  pro-
ductivity. Yet, not everyone experiences these spillovers. Both access
to and the effect of entrepreneurial spillovers vary by demographic 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

group, such that women and Black individuals experience substantially 
fewer opportunities to launch new entrepreneurial careers out of these 
connections.

What do these findings mean for policymakers? This paper demon-
strates the ‘‘status quo’’ of entrepreneurial spillovers across individu-
als in the workplace. The presence of these spillovers suggests that 
there are many individuals who could become entrepreneurs under 
the ‘‘right’’ circumstances — people are nudged towards entrepreneur-
ship after working with former entrepreneurs. But, because most en-
trepreneurial coworkers were not superstars, these spillovers are lim-
ited  in  their  ability  to  increase  productivity  dramatically.  Further-
more, underrepresented demographic groups in entrepreneurship are 
frequently excluded from or not impacted by these spillover oppor-
tunities. As a consequence, policymakers may have to push beyond 
this  status  quo  in  order  to  generate  productivity  gains  and  greater 
entrepreneurial diversity.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Melanie  Wallskog  reports  financial  support  was  provided  by  Stan-
ford University Stanford Institute for Research in the Social Sciences. 
Melanie Wallskog reports financial support was provided by Stanford 
University Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. Melanie 
Wallskog reports financial support was provided by National Science 
Foundation. If there are other authors, they declare that they have 
no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Data appendix

In this section, I present additional details on how I construct several 
variables from U.S. Census Bureau datasets, which are described with 
fewer details in Section 2.

A.1. Longitudinal employer household dynamics (LEHD)

The LEHD is the crucial source of data for this paper, as I use the 
LEHD both to identify entrepreneurs and to connect individuals with 
their coworkers. The LEHD is constructed from firm-side state unem-
ployment insurance (UI) records. It contains quarterly information on 
employment and earnings for most individuals within a state, with 
longitudinal employer and individual identifiers that can be followed 
across  states.  These  longitudinal  identifiers  allow  me  to  track  the 
entrepreneurial outcomes of individuals and their coworkers over time. 
I use LEHD data from 1993 to 2013 for a balanced sample of 18 states.34
The  LEHD  contains  information  on  earnings  and  demographics. 
The  earnings  include  salaries  and  wages  as  well  as  bonuses,  stock 
options, and other cash pay, allowing me to find top (labor income) 
earnings at each firm; this allows me to identify entrepreneurs as top 
earners. I use the CPI-U from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) to 
deflate earnings measures to 2010 dollars. The LEHD also contains 
demographic information for individuals, including date of birth, sex, 

34 This results in a balanced panel of the following 18 states: AK, AZ, CA, 
CO, FL, ID, IL, IN, KS, LA, MD, MO MT, NC, OR, WA, WI, WY. In 2013, these 
states account for 43.0% of total (pay period including March 12) employment, 
44.8% of firms, and 44.4% of establishments in the U.S. (50 states and D.C.), 
estimated using the Business Dynamics Statistics dataset (the public tabulations 
of the U.S. Census Bureaus’ Longitudinal Business Database). Other states have 
incomplete or fluctuating coverage over this time period and so are excluded 
in order to create a balanced panel of states; the LEHD does have data in 
previous years for a handful of states, but I choose to start in 1993 in order 
to get as many states as I can while still maintaining a long panel.

14 

M. Wallskog

race/ethnicity, education, and country of birth, which allows me to 
explore the heterogeneity of entrepreneurial spillovers.35 I define an 
individual’s age in a year as the difference between the year and the 
individual’s year of birth (such that their age is their age on December 
31st of that year) and restrict to individuals aged 20–69.36

Using the LEHD, I study employers at two levels of aggregation. 
First, the least aggregated firm unit with known employees within the 
LEHD is a state-level unemployment insurance account (called a State 
Employer Identification Number, or SEIN).37 I refer to this unit as an
establishment, but note that this unit can contain multiple physical 
establishments of a single firm within a given state. That is, an SEIN 
is a tax ID number that pools together physical establishments of a 
firm within a given state, generally within a given sector. I primarily 
study individuals and their coworkers (i.e., other workers) at the SEIN 
level, since I assume that individuals have the most contact within their 
firm with coworkers at the same SEIN. Second, for my measures of 
firm outcomes (and robustness for coworkers), I study firms, pooling 
across states and sectors. That is, a firm consists of all establishments 
belonging to the same national firm, within my sample of states.38 Note 
that for firms that only exist in my sample of states, my measure of a 
firm captures the entire firm; for firms that exist in states outside of my 
sample, my measure of a firm will only capture part of the firm.

The LEHD provides detailed information on the industry of each 
establishment, which is useful both for controlling for industry patterns 
to entrepreneurship and for exploring heterogeneity and mechanisms. I 
use the 6-digit NAICS codes39 to group establishments by industry. For 
each firm, I assign the sector (approximately 2-digit NAICS codes) with 
the majority of employees, summing across establishments.

The LEHD covers almost all sectors of the economy, making it an 
ideal source for studying entrepreneurial spillovers in a broad context 
and sectoral heterogeneity. Namely, it includes workers covered by the 
UI system (i.e., workers who could claim UI benefits if they experi-
ence an eligible dismissal from their employer); in 1994, this mass 
of workers reflected about 96% of employment and 92.5% of wages 
and salaries (BLS (1997, pg. 42)). Due to the nature of the UI system, 
the data does not include small non-profits, self-employed workers, 
some agricultural workers, and federal government workers.40 Note 
that this nature of the LEHD means that some firm owners, especially 
sole proprietors, are not covered by the LEHD because they do not take 

35 The  demographic  information  is  drawn  from  other  Census  and  gov-
ernment  datasets,  mostly  the  Decennial  Censuses  and  the  Social  Security 
Administration’s Numident file. Coverage is imperfect, and while the Census 
does impute missing values, I only use variation from the non-imputed values. 
About 5% of individuals have imputed sex and date and place of birth, while 
about 20% have imputed race and ethnicity and about 85% have missing 
education (see https://lehd.ces.census.gov/data/lehd-snapshot-doc/).
36 When I study future entrepreneurship, I restrict to individuals aged 20–64, 
for all of whom I can study entrepreneurship in the next five years up to the 
age of 69.
37 Note that the U.S. Census Bureau assigns individuals within an SEIN to 
distinct locations, called SEIN-units; this is an imputation and thus cannot be 
reliably used to study spillovers across coworkers.
38 That is, I combine all SEINs that map to the national Census variable 
FIRMID, using the LEHD’s ECFT26 crosswalk. The FIRMID variable allows me 
to connect individuals in the LEHD to firm outcomes in the remaining datasets.
39 I use the 2012 ‘‘FNL’’ NAICS codes that source industry information from 
both the Covered Employment and Wages program and the LBD (Vilhuber 
et al. (2014)). 6-digit NAICS codes are the most disaggregated industry codes 
available and are quite narrow. For example, NAICS 311111 consists of firms 
that manufacture dog and cat food, while NAICS 311119 consists of firms that 
manufacture food for other animals; and NAICS 441110 consists of automobile 
dealers that sell new cars, while NAICS 441120 consists of dealers that sell 
used cars.
40 For  details,  see  Kornfeld  and  Bloom  (1999,  pg.  173),  BLS  (1997, 
pg. 43) and http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/pdf/uilawcompar/
2012/coverage.pdf.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

labor income earnings (Hyatt et al., 2021); I discuss how this affects my 
definition of entrepreneurship in Section 2.

For each individual, I define a primary firm and primary estab-
lishment for each year. An individual’s primary firm is the firm from 
which they earn the most in the year (summing across all establish-
ments) and thus at which they presumably spend the most time; their 
primary establishment is the establishment at their primary firm at 
which they earn the most in the year. Below, I measure characteristics 
of an individual’s coworkers, who are other workers at the individual’s 
primary establishment in a given year, for whom the establishment is 
also their primary establishment. I restrict all samples to individuals 
with  at  least  one  coworker,  i.e.,  individuals  at  establishments  with 
at least two workers (from whom the establishment is their primary 
establishment). When I control for an individual’s establishment’s em-
ployment, I count these coworkers (i.e., excluding workers for whom 
the establishment is not their primary establishment in the year).

In  an  attempt  to  assess  the  quality  of  firms,  I  measure  several 
outcomes in the LEHD. I proxy firm survival by tracking whether a 
new firm continues to employ individuals in the years after it enters; 
e.g., a firm survives to a second year if it employs individuals (counting 
all earners at the firm, regardless of whether the firm is the earners’ 
primary firm, in my sample of states) in the year after it enters.41 I also 
measure total employment and payroll levels and growth, including 
all individuals who have earnings at a firm in a given year (i.e., not 
restricting to individuals for whom the firm is their primary firm). 
Finally,  I  flag  firms  that  are  particularly  large  or  fast-growing,  by 
identifying firms whose employment levels or growth fall in the top 
10% of the given measure among firms that entered in the same year, 
in the same (6-digit NAICS) industry.

Measuring entrepreneurship.  While there are several ways of measuring 
entrepreneurship, I follow the recent literature and call an individual 
an entrepreneur if they are a top three earner at a new firm, although 
I conduct a variety of robustness and audit checks on this definition. 
This measure of entrepreneurship captures individuals who likely hold 
influential positions at young firms.

In this paper, I consider a broad notion of entrepreneurship. I am 
interested in the founding of firms, so I take an ‘‘initial team’’ approach 
to defining and measuring entrepreneurship. That is, I call an individual 
an entrepreneur if they are amongst the three highest-paid employees 
of a firm in the first year that the firm has paid employees.42

In order to enact this definition, I determine the year in which a 
firm enters. I follow the literature and start by finding the first year a 
firm has positive employment in the national LBD, i.e., the first year the 
firm’s oldest establishment has employment in the payroll period that 
contains March 12 (Haltiwanger et al. (2013, pg. 353)).43 I use this first 
year as each firm’s entry year, with minor adjustments. First, some 
firms, particularly small and new ones, appear in the LEHD without 
appearing in the LBD. Second, some firms appear in the LEHD years 
before or after they first appear in the LBD.44 For firms in either of these 

41 In some cases, firms ‘‘dip in and out’’ of employment within the LEHD, 
such that a firm may appear to not survive to the second year after entry but 
then reappears in the third year after entry.
42 I follow Agarwal et al. (2016), Kerr and Kerr (2017), and Azoulay et al. 
(2018) in doing this; Azoulay et al. (2018) audits this initial team definition 
using W-2 records to compare founders to initial team members. They find 
that ‘‘90% of the owner-workers are in fact among the top three earners in 
the firm during the first year’’, though this coverage is noisy.
43 Note that the LBD begins in 1976, such that firm entry years are left 
censored in 1976. I focus on entrepreneurship, and thus firm entry, between 
1994 and 2013, so this censorship is not relevant.
44 A firm may appear in the LEHD before it appears in the LBD because of 
the structure of the LBD: because LBD employment is based on the payroll 
period that contains March 12, firms that enter after that payroll period will 
appear in the LEHD but only appear in the LBD in the following year (if 

15 

M. Wallskog

two cases, I take the first year that the firm appears with employment 
in the LEHD (in my sample of states) as its entry year.45 Finally, while 
the firm identifiers are longitudinal, it is possible (but uncommon) for 
firm IDs to change over time. Because I am interested in new firms, 
rather  than,  e.g.,  firms  that  have  changed  ownership,  I  attempt  to 
avoid misclassifying firm ID changes as new firms by ignoring in my 
definition of entrepreneurship below firms that are very large in their 
entry year,46 who I assume are less likely to be truly new firms.47

Given a firm’s entry year, I identify the ‘‘initial team’’ of the firm 
as the individuals with the three highest annual earnings in the firm 
in  the  entry  year.  Unless  otherwise  noted,  I  call  an  individual  an
entrepreneur in a given year if they are one of the top three highest 
paid employees of a firm and the year is the firm’s entry year.48

This notion of an entrepreneur is intended to capture an individual 
who most likely is integral to or closely witnesses the decision-making 
at a young firm, regardless of whether they are a legal owner or founder 
of the firm. There are two important aspects to consider for interpreting 
this definition. First, my definition of a firm’s entry year marks the first 
year it has paid employees. Firms may have existed previously without 
employees, such that the entry year likely lags the initial planning and 
starting of a firm. Nonetheless, the transition to being a firm with paid 
employees is an extremely important step in a firm’s life, particularly 
for firms that hope to grow.

Second, my definition will not pick up ‘‘owner-investors’’, who take 
their  payoffs  in  the  form  of  profit  dividends  rather  than  in  wages 
(and thus would not appear in the LEHD). This is particularly relevant 
for sole proprietorships and partnerships, for which owners are not 
supposed to take wages, and thus should not appear in the LEHD (Hyatt 

they survive). A firm may appear in the LEHD after it appears in the LBD for 
several reasons. First, firms only appear in the LEHD if they pay unemployment 
insurance taxes, which may not be relevant to all, especially younger, firms in 
the LBD. Second, because my LEHD sample contains a subsample of all states, 
it is possible for firms to appear in the LEHD, in my sample of states, after 
they appear in the LBD and in states outside my sample.
45 In order to avoid misclassifying old firms that are simply entering the 
sample of states in the LEHD as new firms, I ignore in my definition of 
entrepreneurship below any firm that appears in the LEHD strictly more than 
two years after its first year in the LBD.
46 I.e., firms whose entry year LEHD employment exceeds the 99th percentile 
of employment (slightly under 200 employees) for all entering firms.
47 An alternative method to determine a firm’s entry year without the LBD is 
to use the firm age variable as listed in the LEHD (as described in Haltiwanger 
et al. (2014)). This variable is based on several sources, mostly the LBD and 
the National Employer Characteristics File (NECF), and is meant to provide 
age information for all firms in the LEHD (note that while the majority of the 
LEHD establishments can be mapped to the LBD, where firm age has been 
traditionally measured, this mapping is biased: smaller, younger firms are less 
likely to be matched). In Table OA.15, I conduct a robustness analysis, defining 
entrepreneurship using the LEHD firm age variable, where I identify a firm’s 
entry year by the year in which the firm is aged 0 (note that the Census 
zero-indexes age, while I one-index age); the results are virtually the same as 
my main extensive margin results: a one standard deviation (8.8 percentage 
points) increase in the share predicts a 0.22 percentage point higher likelihood 
of future entrepreneurship, 8.5% of the mean outcome.
48 Note that this firm need not be the entrepreneur’s primary firm in the 
year and that not all firms have three entrepreneurs. For a more restricted 
definition, in Table OA.15 I consider only the top earner at new firms, which 
yields similar results: a one standard deviation (5.9 percentage point) in the 
share of coworkers who were recently the top earner at a new firm predicts 
a  0.13  percentage  point  higher  likelihood  of  becoming  a  top  earner  at  a 
new firm in the next five years, 9.13% of the mean outcome. In untabulated 
results, I similarly investigate and find qualitatively similar intensive margin 
results using this definition. I additionally consider marginally less restrictive 
definitions in Table OA.15 in which I consider the top two earners at new 
firms or, alternatively, all earners at new firms in their first quarter with workers; 
results are similar under these two definitions.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

et al. (2021)). I take any distinction between entrepreneurs, ‘‘owner-
workers’’, managers, ‘‘firm-runners’’, etc. to be semantics alone; put 
differently, as discussed below, what matters for coworker learning 
is experience as part of a firm when the firm is very young, rather 
than strictly investment or idea-generation experience. I further con-
duct a robustness exercise by separately analyzing entrepreneurs at 
corporations, vs. those at sole proprietorships or partnerships, since the 
individuals I identify as entrepreneurs at corporations are more likely 
to be the true owners and founders of their companies.49

Finally, note that for my analysis of spillovers, an individual is only 
identified as an entrepreneur in their firm’s entry year; they are also 
always considered a worker, regardless of their entrepreneur status.

Entrepreneurial outcome in the LEHD.  I measure absolute firm size in 
terms of employment and payroll from the LEHD, counting all indi-
viduals with employment at a firm in a year (i.e., not restricting to 
individuals for whom the firm is their primary firm). I also measure 
relative  firm  size  by  identifying  firms  whose  LEHD  employment  or 
payroll falls in the top 10% among firms that enter in the same year and 
(6-digit NAICS) industry. Note that the thresholds determining which 
firms are in the top 10% of a given outcome are based on all firms that 
start in a given year, not restricting to firms started by individuals in 
my main reduced form sample; the thresholds are also calculated by 
weighting firms equally, rather than by weighting firms by the number 
of entrepreneurs (up to three). In practice, this means that more than 
10% of previous entrepreneurs started firms with top 10%.

I measure firm survival and entrepreneur retention using the LEHD. 
I define a firm’s survival to a given firm age based on whether the 
firm has nonzero employment at that age and say that, e.g., a firm 
survives to age 2 if it employs workers in its second year. In this paper, 
I consider survival as a marker of success — more successful firms 
survive for more years; I abstract from the possibility of successful exits 
(e.g., mergers and acquisitions). I measure whether an entrepreneur 
is  still  employed  at  their  entrepreneurial  firm  at  a  given  firm  age 
(regardless of whether the firm is their primary firm).

A.2. Longitudinal Business Database (LBD)

I use the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to construct my 
definition of entrepreneurship, as described in Section 2.2. The LBD’s 
coverage starts in 1976 and tracks all U.S. business establishments and 
firms with paid employees over time, including physical establishments 
in states not covered by the LEHD in early years.50 I aggregate the LBD 
to the firm level.

A.3. Annual survey of entrepreneurs (ASE)

The ASE collects information from firms’ owners on a variety of out-
comes which are useful for studying the mechanisms of entrepreneurial 
spillovers. This dataset is a firm-level survey based on a collaboration 
of the Census with the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation and the 
Minority Business Development Agency.5152 The ASE ran annually to 
collect  2014,  2015,  and  2016  economic  and  demographic  data  on 

49 In Table OA.15, I estimate models in which I only consider each legal 
type, in turn. I still find a positive coefficient on the share of an individual’s 
coworkers  who  were  recently  entrepreneurs,  if  I  restrict  my  definition  of 
entrepreneurship (for both dependent and independent variables) to corpo-
rations. For corporations, I find that a one standard deviation (8.3 percentage 
points) increase in the share predicts a 0.12 percentage point higher likelihood 
of future (corporation) entrepreneurship, 5.7% of the mean outcome. (I also 
find positive coefficients when I restrict to other legal types.)
50 For details, see Jarmin and Miranda (2002).
51 For details, see Foster and Norman (2017) and https://www.census.gov/
programs-surveys/ase/about.html.
52 This data is at the FIRMID-level.

16 

M. Wallskog

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104077 

Ewens, Michael, 2023. Race and gender in entrepreneurial finance. In: Eckbo, B. Espen, 
Phillips, Gordon M., Sorensen, Morten (Eds.), In: Handbook of the Economics of 
Corporate Finance: Private Equity and Entrepreneurial Finance, vol. 1, Elsevier.
Field, Erica, Jayachandran, Seema, Pande, Rohini, Rigol, Natalia, 2016. Friendship at 
work: Can peer effects catalyze female entrepreneurship? Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 
8 (2), 125–153.

Flood, Sarah, King, Miriam, Rodgers, Renae, Ruggles, Steven, Warren, J. Robert, 2021. 
Integrated public use microdata series, current population survey: Version 9.0. 
Minneapolis, MN.

Foster, Lucia, Norman, Patrice, 2017. The annual survey of entrepreneurs. J. Econ. Soc. 

Meas. 42 (3–4), 199–224.

Giannetti, Mariassunta, Simonov, Andrei, 2009. Social interactions and entrepreneurial 

activity. J. Econ. Manag. Strat. 18 (3), 665–709.

Gompers, Paul, Lerner, Josh, Scharfstein, David, 2005. Entrepreneurial spawning: Public 
corporations and the genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999. J. Financ. 60 (2), 
577–614.

Guiso, Luigi, Pistaferri, Luigi, Schivardi, Fabiano, 2021. Learning entrepreneurship from 

other entrepreneurs? J. Labor Econ. 39 (1), 135–191.

Hacamo, Isaac, Kleiner, Kristoph, 2022. Forced entrepreneurs. J. Financ. 77 (1), 49–83.
Haltiwanger, John, Hyatt, Henry R., McEntarfer, Erika, Sousa, Liliana, Tibbets, Stephen, 
2014. Firm age and size in the longitudinal employer-household dynamics data. US 
Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-14-16.

Haltiwanger, John, Jarmin, Ron S., Miranda, Javier, 2013. Who creates jobs? Small 

versus large versus young. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95 (2), 347–361.

Hampole, Menaka, Truffa, Francesca, Wong, Ashley, 2024. Peer effects and the gender 

gap in corporate leadership: Evidence from MBA students.

Hvide, Hans K., Oyer, Paul, 2018. Dinner Table Human Capital and Entrepreneurship. 

Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hyatt, Henry, Murray, Seth, Sandusky, Kristin, 2021. Business income dynamics and 

labor market fluidity. IZA J. Labor Econ. 10 (1), 1–51.

Jarmin, Ron S., Miranda, Javier, 2002. The longitudinal business database. Available 

Kerr, Sari Pekkala, Kerr, William R., 2017. 5. Immigrant Entrepreneurship. University 

Klenow, Peter J., Li, Huiyu, 2021. Innovative growth accounting. NBER Macroecon. 

at SSRN 2128793.

of Chicago Press.

Annu. 35 (1), 245–295.

Klepper, Steven, Sleeper, Sally, 2005. Entry by spinoffs. Manag. Sci. 51 (8), 1291–1306.
Kornfeld, Robert, Bloom, Howard S., 1999. Measuring program impacts on earnings 
and employment: Do unemployment insurance wage reports from employers agree 
with surveys of individuals. J. Labor Econ. 17 (1), 168–197.

Lerner, Josh, Malmendier, Ulrike, 2013. With a little help from my (random) friends: 
Success and failure in post-business school entrepreneurship. Rev. Financ. Stud. 26 
(10), 2411–2452.

Lindquist, Matthew J., Sol, Joeri, Van Praag, Mirjam, 2015. Why do entrepreneurial 

parents have entrepreneurial children? J. Labor Econ. 33 (2), 269–296.

Ma, Song, Murfin, Justin, Pratt, Ryan, 2022. Young firms, old capital. J. Financ. Econ. 

146 (1), 331–356.

Manski, Charles F., 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection 

problem. Rev. Econ. Stud. 60 (3), 531–542.

Mertz,  Mikkel  Baggesgaard,  Ronchi,  Maddalena,  Salvestrini,  Viola,  2024.  Female 
representation and talent allocation in entrepreneurship: The role of early exposure 
to entrepreneur.

Nanda, Ramana, Sørensen, Jesper B., 2010. Workplace peers and entrepreneurship. 

Manag. Sci. 56 (7), 1116–1126.

Rocha, Vera, Van Praag, Mirjam, 2020. Mind the gap: The role of gender in en-
trepreneurial career choice and social influence by founders. Strat. Manag. J. 41 
(5), 841–866.

Sacerdote, Bruce, 2014. Experimental and quasi-experimental analysis of peer effects: 

two steps forward? Annu. Rev. Econ. 6 (1), 253–272.

Shue, Kelly, 2013. Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random 

assignment of MBA peers. Rev. Financ. Stud. 26 (6), 1401–1442.

Tello-Trillo, Cristina, Streiff, Sean, 2020. Matching compustat data to the business 
register 1976 - 2016. US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies CES Technical 
Notes Series 20-07.

United States Census Bureau, 2023. Census bureau restrict-use data.
Vilhuber, Lars, McKinney, Kevin, et al., 2014. LEHD infrastructure files in the census 
RDC-overview. Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau Working Papers 
(14–26).

businesses and owners for a representative sample of non-farm busi-
nesses with paid employees and with receipts of at least $1,000. I 
use information from the surveys’ questions on reasons for owning a 
business.53

A.4. Compustat-SSEL bridge (CSB)

The CSB identifies publicly-traded firms by linking firms in the Cen-
sus data to Standard & Poor’s Compustat database, by year (Tello-Trillo 
and Streiff (2020)). I use this information to investigate whether expo-
sure to more entrepreneurial coworkers predicts future entrepreneurs’ 
firms becoming publicly traded.

A.5. Business register (BR)

The BR provides information on the legal form of businesses, namely 
whether they are structured as corporations, sole proprietorships, part-
nerships, or other forms. I use this information to conduct heterogeneity 
by legal type, in part to help interpret my measure of entrepreneur-
ship.54

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104077.

Data availability

Replication Package for Wallskog (JFE 2025): Entrepreneurial Spillove
rs Across Coworkers (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Agarwal, Rajshree, Campbell, Benjamin A., Franco, April Mitchell, Ganco, Martin, 2016. 
What do I take with me? The mediating effect of spin-out team size and tenure on 
the founder–firm performance relationship. Acad. Manag. J. 59 (3), 1060–1087.
Akcigit, Ufuk, Alp, Harun, Pearce, Jeremy G., Prato, Marta, 2021. Career choice of 

entrepreneurs, inventors and the rise of firms.

Azoulay, Pierre, Jones, Benjamin, Kim, J. Daniel, Miranda, Javier, 2018. Age and 
High-Growth Entrepreneurship. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Babina, Tania, Howell, Sabrina T., 2024. Entrepreneurial spillovers from corporate R&D. 

J. Labor Econ. 42 (2), 469–509.

Bennett, Victor Manuel, Robinson, David T., 2024. Why aren’t there more minority 

entrepreneurs? Available at SSRN 4360750.

BLS, 1997. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Handbook of Methods.
Bosma,  Niels,  Hessels,  Jolanda,  Schutjens,  Veronique,  Van  Praag,  Mirjam,  Ver-
heul, Ingrid, 2012. Entrepreneurship and role models. J. Econ. Psychol. 33 (2), 
410–424.

Calder-Wang, Sophie Q., Gompers, Paul A., 2017. Diversity in Innovation. Tech. Rep., 

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chetty,  Raj,  Jackson,  Matthew  O.,  Kuchler,  Theresa,  Stroebel,  Johannes, 
Hendren,  Nathaniel,  Fluegge,  Robert  B.,  Gong,  Sara,  Gonzalez,  Federico, 
Grondin, Armelle, Jacob, Matthew, et al., 2022. Social capital II: determinants of 
economic connectedness. Nature 608 (7921), 122–134.

Choi, Joonkyu, Goldschlag, Nathan, Haltiwanger, John, Kim, J. Daniel, 2019. Founding 

teams and startup performance. Available at SSRN 3481850.

Dillon, Eleanor W., Stanton, Christopher T., 2017. Self-Employment Dynamics and the 
Returns to Entrepreneurship. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Djankov, Simeon, Qian, Yingyi, Roland, Gérard, Zhuravskaya, Ekaterina, 2006. En-
trepreneurship  in  China  and  Russia  compared.  J.  Eur.  Econ.  Assoc.  4  (2–3), 
352–365.

53 See 
documentation/questionnaires.2014.html for the 2014 questionnaire.
54 For details, see https://www.census.gov/econ/overview/mu0600.html.

https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ase/technical-

17 

