Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Exorbitant privilege? Quantitative easing and the bond market subsidy of 
prospective fallen angels(cid:73)
Viral V. Acharya a, Ryan Banerjee b
a Department of Finance, New York University Stern School of Business, 44 West 4th St, 9-65, NY 10012, USA
b Committee on the Global Financial System, Bank for International Settlements, Centralbahnplatz 2, 4051 Basel, Switzerland
c Research and Statistics Group, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, NY 10025, USA
d Department of Finance, Nova School of Business and Economics, R. da Holanda 1, 2775-405 Carcavelos, Portugal
e Department of Business Economics, Erasmus School of Economics, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, Netherlands

, Matteo Crosignani c

,∗, Tim Eisert d

, Renée Spigt e

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We  document  capital  misallocation  in  the  U.S.  investment-grade  (IG)  corporate  bond  market,  driven  by 
quantitative easing (QE). Prospective fallen angels — risky firms just above the IG cutoff — enjoyed subsidized 
bond financing in 2009–19. This effect is driven by Fed purchases of securities inducing long-duration IG-
focused investors to rebalance their portfolios towards higher-yielding IG bonds. The benefiting firms (i) 
exploited the sluggish downward adjustment of credit ratings after M&A to finance risky acquisitions with 
bond issuances, and (ii) increased market share affecting competitors’ employment and investment, but (iii) 
suffered severe downgrades at the onset of the pandemic.

Dataset link: Exorbitant Privilege? Quantitative
Easing and the Bond Market Subsidy of Prospe
ctive Fallen Angels? (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G23
G24
G34

Keywords:
Capital misallocation
Corporate bond market
Investment-grade bonds
BBB rating
Large-scale asset purchases (LSAP)
Credit ratings

1. Introduction

The unprecedented scale of monetary policy interventions since the 
Global Financial Crisis (GFC) has left many commentators wondering 
whether  central  banks  have  left  too  large  a  footprint  in  financial 

markets, potentially distorting asset prices and capital allocation.1 Our 
paper provides novel evidence in this direction by showing that the 
Federal Reserve’s Quantitative Easing (QE) program appears to have 
distorted prices in an important segment of the U.S. corporate bond 

(cid:73)

We thank the editor, Toni Whited, an anonymous referee, Ed Altman, Jennie Bai, Richard Cantor, Olivier de Jonghe, Antonio Falato, Quirin Fleckenstein, 
Itay Goldstein, Victoria Ivashina, Kose John, Jane Li, Francis Longstaff, Camelia Minoiu, Andrea Presbitero, Tyler Muir, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen for their 
comments. We also thank seminar and conference participants at the NBER Summer Institute Capital Markets and the Economy, AFA Annual Meetings, Cornell, 
Oxford Said–ETH Zurich Macro-finance Conference, 10th MoFiR Workshop on Banking, 2022 CEBRA Annual Meeting, KAIST, Deutsche Bundesbank/FRIC/CEPR 
‘‘Credit Risk over the Business Cycle’’ conference, FSB Systemic Risks in Non-Bank Financial Intermediation conference, 2021 Federal Reserve Stress Testing 
Research  conference,  CEPR  Endless  Summer  Conference  on  Financial  Intermediation  and  Corporate  Finance,  Bank  of  Spain,  NYU  Shanghai  Joint-School 
Macro/Finance Seminar, NYU Stern, Cornell, Korea University Business School, KU Leuven, University of Melbourne, Norges Bank, Erasmus Rotterdam, University 
of South Carolina, New York Fed, University of Bonn, Humboldt University, ESADE Spring Workshop, and the BIS for valuable comments. We thank Erica Bucchieri 
and William Arnesen for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, the BIS, or any of their staff. A previous version of this paper circulated with the title ‘‘Exorbitant 
Privilege? The Bond Market Subsidy of Prospective Fallen Angels’’.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:  matteo.crosignani@ny.frb.org (M. Crosignani).

1 These concerns were echoed in the remarks made on March 20, 2020 by the Secretary of the Treasury Yellen, who stated that ‘‘Non-financial corporations 
entered this crisis with enormous debt loads, and that is a vulnerability. They had borrowed excessively in my view through issuing corporate bonds and leveraged loans. 
Arguably, this was a borrowing binge that was incented by the long period we had of low interest rates. Investors were also engaged in a search for yield, so this debt was 
attractive to pension funds, insurance companies, and investors [...]’’. Remarks at the ‘‘COVID-19 and the economy’’ Brookings webinar (link).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104084
Received 20 May 2023; Received in revised form 22 April 2025; Accepted 24 April 2025
Available online 15 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Fig. 1.  The growth of the BBB-rated segment of the U.S. corporate bond market. This figure shows the growth of U.S. non-financial corporate debt and, in particular, of the 
U.S. BBB-rated corporate bond market. The top left panel shows the evolution of financial sector debt, non-financial sector debt, and household debt, normalized by GDP. The 
sources are series dodfs, tbsdodns, and cmdebt from FRED. The top right panel shows the evolution on the left y-axis of (i) corporate bonds, (ii) mortgages, non-mortgage deposits 
(includes loans from banks, credit unions, and savings and loans associations), and commercial paper, (iii) other loans (loans from non-bank institutions, excluding mortgages, 
and industrial revenue bonds), and on the right y-axis of (iv) BBB-rated corporate bonds as a ratio of total corporate bond volume. The sources are series cblbsnncb, mlbsnncb, 
ncbilia027n, cplbsnncb, and olalbsnncb from FRED, Capital IQ, and Thomson Reuters. The bottom left panel shows the differences in offering spread (primary market bond yields 
minus Treasury yields with similar maturity) for newly issued bonds. The bottom right panel shows the asset-weighted debt over EBITDA (left y-axis) and market leverage (right 
y-axis) for BBB-rated and other IG-rated firms.

market, viz., the riskiest BBB-rated bonds, leading to a misallocation of 
capital in the economy.

By way of motivation, we start with some striking observations 
(documented  in  Fig.   1)  about  the  corporate  bond  market.  Its  size 
doubled since the GFC, resulting in non-financial sector debt being the 
fastest-growing component of private-sector debt (including household 
and financial sector debt). This growth was largely driven by the BBB-
rated segment, namely firms just above the investment-grade (IG) cutoff 
which face prospects of becoming ‘‘fallen angels’’ upon a downgrade 
and experiencing a steep increase in their cost of borrowing. In par-
ticular, between 2008 and 2020, the amount outstanding of BBB-rated 
bonds more than tripled to $3.5 trillion, representing more than 40% of 
all non-financial corporate debt, up from less than 25% in 2008. During 
the same period, BBB spreads dropped from around 400 to around 150 
basis points even though the profitability of BBB-rated firms did not 
keep up with their increased indebtedness and their book as well as 
market leverage rose. These dynamics are unique to the BBB rating. 
Other IG bond spreads did not fall as much and other IG-rated issuers 
in fact improved their debt-to-profitability and leverage ratios during 
the same period.

In many respects, the growth in issuance of risky investment-grade 
bonds could be considered a desired outcome of monetary policy easing 
after the GFC. In particular, QE is aimed at pushing investors into 
riskier  assets  by  lowering  the  yields  on  government  and  mortgage-
backed bonds (Gagnon et al., 2011), and lowering in turn the yields on 
other long-term riskier assets (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 
2011). However, the growing issuance in the riskiest IG bucket also 
comes with a buildup of vulnerabilities which materialized at the onset 

of the COVID-19 pandemic. The volume of debt downgraded from BBB 
to speculative grade in a few weeks at the beginning of 2020 was 
more than twice the volume of similar downgrades during the entire
GFC, leading, together with other market-wide stresses, to the Federal 
Reserve (Fed) stepping in to stabilize the corporate bond market in the 
second half of March and into April 2020.

In this paper, we investigate these trends, provide detailed evidence 
that they are — at least in part — a consequence of the QE programs 
on financial and real sectors, and document their financial and real 
spillovers.  Specifically,  we  document  the  existence  of  a  bond  mar-
ket subsidy for ‘‘prospective fallen angels’’, i.e., downgrade-vulnerable 
BBB-rated firms which are on the cusp of the IG cutoff. The subsidy 
originates from a demand for riskier BBB-rated bonds by yield-hungry 
‘‘IG-focused’’ investors highly exposed to the QE-induced compression 
of long-term premia in fixed-income securities. In particular, as the 
quantity of the Fed’s QE purchases expands, financial institutions such 
as insurance companies earn lower term premia on securities purchased 
by  the  Fed  such  as  Treasuries,  Agency  Mortgage-Backed  Securities 
(MBS), and Agency debt securities, and simultaneously hold more and 
more of securities such as corporate bonds which incur relatively higher 
capital  requirements.  This  combination  of  term-premia  compression 
and portfolio rebalancing induces in these investors a preference for 
IG bonds, which incur a relatively lower capital charge, but within IG 
bonds those that have higher yields and yet are the least likely to be 
downgraded.

In response to the subsidy, prospective fallen angels issue more 
bonds, largely to finance M&A activity. This way, they (i) meet the 
heightened investor demand for BBB-rated bonds; and (ii) take advan-
tage of the reluctance of credit rating agencies to downgrade issuers 

2 

V.V. Acharya et al.

after M&A, effectively guaranteeing that their rating remains BBB for 
at least a few more years. This creates, in equilibrium, a privilege in the 
cost of bond financing of prospective fallen angels. The benefiting firms 
increase their market share via M&A, exerting on other firms negative 
externalities that are similar to the congestion effects created by zombie 
firms on healthier firms (Caballero et al., 2008).

We tease out this mechanism by combining various data sources 
at the issuer-, bond-, and investor-level. We use issuer-level data from 
Compustat and WRDS Capital IQ, and ratings data from Standard and 
Poor’s, Moody’s, and Fitch. Our bond-level data consists of primary 
market prices from Mergent and secondary market prices from TRACE. 
Finally, for a crucial part of our analysis that highlights the demand 
for bonds from investors exposed to QE, we use investor security-level 
holdings data from eMAXX Bond Holders from Refinitiv matched with 
holdings in the Federal Reserve System Open Market Account (SOMA) 
portfolio.

We  begin  our  empirical  analysis  by  introducing  a  measure  of
downgrade-vulnerability of a non-financial firm based on the Altman 
Z’’-score (Altman, 2020), a credit risk score built with balance sheet 
and income statement information. Specifically, we classify a firm as 
‘‘downgrade-vulnerable’’  if  its  Z’’-score  is  lower  than  the  historical 
median Z’’-score of the next lowest rating category. We confirm the 
validity of our measure by documenting that downgrade-vulnerable 
firms (i) look worse along various observable firm characteristics, such 
as leverage, profitability, net worth, and interest coverage ratio; (ii) 
exhibit lower employment growth, investment, sales, and asset growth 
once  they  become  downgrade-vulnerable;  and  (iii)  are  more  likely 
to be downgraded or put on a negative watchlist by rating agencies 
than non-downgrade-vulnerable firms. We also show that BBB-rated 
downgrade-vulnerable firms are treated favorably by rating agencies.

Using this measure, we define a ‘‘prospective fallen angel’’ as a 
BBB-rated firm that is vulnerable to being downgraded. We show that 
investors exposed to QE drive the demand for corporate bonds issued 
by prospective fallen angels as they rebalance their portfolio away from 
Treasuries—a dynamic reflected in bond prices. We define investor-
level time-varying QE exposure as the share of investors’ total Treasury 
holdings that are purchased by the Federal Reserve. Exploiting the 
granularity of our corporate bond holdings data, we compare in each 
quarter holdings of bonds issued by the same firm that are held by 
investors with a different exposure to QE. We find that the within-
firm correlation between investor exposure to QE and investor bond 
holdings is more pronounced for bonds issued by prospective fallen 
angels.  This  is  the  case  especially  for  long-duration  investors  that 
invest  mostly  in  IG  bonds,  in  particular,  insurance  companies  with 
minimum guarantee variable annuities and open-ended debt mutual 
funds focused on IG bond investments.

Consistent with this demand being priced in corporate bond yields, 
we show that during 2009 to 2019 prospective fallen angels benefited 
from  a  reduction  in  bond  spreads  relative  to  the  rest  of  the  BBB 
segment—a relative pattern between downgrade-vulnerable and non-
downgrade-vulnerable firm borrowing costs not present for other rating 
classes. Moreover, when replacing bond spreads with equity-market-
based measures of expected default, spreads in syndicated loan markets, 
or bond spreads before the GFC, we find that across all rating categories 
(including BBB), downgrade-vulnerable firms have higher — not lower 
— funding costs. In other words, we identify for the BBB-rated firms 
during 2009 to 2019 a corporate bond market subsidy, which we refer to 
as the ‘‘exorbitant privilege’’ of prospective fallen angels. We estimate 
that, depending on reasonable assumptions, the bond market subsidy 
accruing to prospective fallen angels amounted to between $43 billion 
and $120 billion over this period. To verify the special role played by 
investors’ demand in driving the subsidy, we also document that the 
yields of bonds issued by prospective fallen angels are reduced by the 
QE exposure of investors holding the bonds.

We document that prospective fallen angels meet the QE-induced 
demand of IG investors by supplying bonds largely for the purpose of 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

financing risky acquisitions. These M&A deals allow prospective fallen 
angels to delay downgrades. In particular, the short-term probability of 
being downgraded to speculative grade is close to zero for prospective 
fallen angels that conduct an M&A transaction. Announcement effects 
of these acquisitions in the stock market suggest that they are value-
destroying. However, announcements are usually accompanied by a 
promise by firms to the public to reduce the debt taken on to finance 
the acquisitions, which induces rating agencies to be more sluggish 
in downgrading these firms: data indicate that these announcements 
mostly end up being broken promises. The resulting buildup of vul-
nerability of these firms over the extended period of QE led to an 
unprecedented  wave  of  fallen  angels,  with  several  downgraded  by 
multiple notches at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Finally, we find that across rating classes, BBB-rated firms also have 
the highest market share by sales over our sample period. Moreover, 
this share increased over the last decade, and the increase was entirely 
driven by the prospective fallen angels that engaged in M&A activity. 
We  then  show  that  this  dynamic  adversely  affects  competing  firms 
and has adverse real spillovers. Non-downgrade-vulnerable IG firms 
operating  in  an  industry  with  a  larger  share  of  prospective  fallen 
angels have lower employment growth rates, lower investment levels, 
lower  sales  growth  rates,  and  lower  markups  compared  with  non-
downgrade-vulnerable  firms  operating  in  an  industry  with  a  lower 
share of prospective fallen angels. At the industry-level, we find that the 
presence of prospective fallen angels is associated with higher contem-
poraneous industry-level credit risk and concentration, and eventually 
higher markups as prospective fallen angels keep growing together with 
the industry concentration.

We conclude that quantitative easing led to a capital misallocation 
via a corporate bond market subsidy for prospective fallen angels, an 
exorbitant privilege that they exploited with greater issuance and M&A 
activity  at  the  expense  of  competitors,  but  fragility  at  the  time  of 
the COVID-19 outbreak. Our findings contribute to four inter-related 
strands of literature.

First, we contribute to the literature on the transmission of QE. 
This large literature has documented the effect of QE on asset prices 
(e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011), lending outcomes 
(e.g., Acharya et al., 2019; Luck and Zimmermann, 2020; Rodnyan-
sky  and  Darmouni,  2017),  and  firm  financing  constraints  (e.g.,  Di 
Maggio et al., 2020; Foley-Fisher et al., 2016). Our paper documents 
QE-induced  capital  misallocation  that  might  contribute  to  financial 
vulnerability  such  as  the  materialization  of  corporate  bond  market 
stress at the onset of the pandemic. In this vein, our paper is related to 
speeches by Rajan (2013) and Stein (2013) who warned about the risks 
of QE in terms of excessive financial risk-taking; while they focused on 
likely distortions in the speculative-grade bond market, leveraged loan 
market, and real-estate investment trust (REIT) borrowings, our paper 
shows that distortions have materialized even in the space of IG bonds.
Second, we contribute to the literature on fragility in corporate 
borrowing markets. The documented vulnerability of the IG bond mar-
ket since 2009 is consistent with warning signs from academics and 
practitioners about the BBB market (Altman, 2020; S&P Global, 2020a; 
Çelik  et  al.,  2020;  Blackrock,  2020;  Morgan  Stanley,  2018a,b)  and 
partly explains the large price drop of IG corporate bonds at the onset 
of the COVID-19 pandemic (Haddad et al., 2021; Boyarchenko et al., 
2022; Altman, 2020). The special role of the BBB market is consistent 
with the role of fire-sale ‘‘cliff’’ risk documented in the literature (Falato 
et al., 2021a,b; Gilchrist et al., 2020; Acharya and Steffen, 2020).

Third, we contribute to the literature on the real effects of frictions 
in investor portfolio choice. Consistent with the framework in Vayanos 
and Vila (2021), a few recent papers document the role of bond in-
vestors in the transmission of monetary policy (e.g., Ahmed et al., 2022; 
Darmouni et al., 2021).2 Our paper documents that the reliance of 

2 See also Kubitza (2021) and Greenwood and Vissing-Jorgensen (2018) 
that analyze how the portfolio choice of insurance companies affects firms 
and the yield curve, respectively.

3 

V.V. Acharya et al.

some bond investors on the IG cutoff has interacted with QE policies — 
especially via their impact on yields of long-duration assets — to create 
capital misallocation and buildup of vulnerabilities in the massive BBB 
corporate bond market.

Fourth, we contribute to the literature on credit ratings. A large 
body of literature has shown that credit ratings affect investors’ port-
folio choice (Guerrieri and Kondor, 2012; Cornaggia and Cornaggia, 
2013; Iannotta et al., 2019; Baghai et al., 2022). Becker and Ivashina 
(2015) shows that, within ratings, investors reaching-for-yield might 
tilt their portfolio towards riskier assets. Goldstein and Huang (2020) 
shows that this behavior might, in equilibrium, induce credit rating 
agencies  to  inflate  their  ratings.  Finally,  our  paper  is  also  related 
to  Aktas  et  al.  (2021)  that  shows  that  investment-grade  firms  are 
concerned about acquisition-related downgrades in their M&A activity. 
However, we find that such concern appears to be muted in the case of 
prospective fallen angels due to QE-induced demand for their bonds 
and the sluggishness of credit rating agencies in downgrading after 
M&A.

Overall, our results point out that vulnerability can arise in corpo-
rate bond markets due to a rather complex interaction of easy monetary 
policy, distorted incentives of financial institutions and investors, and 
the sluggishness of rating agencies in responding to foreseeable risks 
while downgrading firms. In this sense, our results are reminiscent of 
the rich interplay of forces at work in leading to the mortgage excess 
around AAA-rated mortgage-backed securities in the buildup to the 
GFC (Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018).

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  2 
presents the theoretical framework and our data, and introduces our 
definition  of  downgrade-vulnerable  firms.  Section  3  shows  that  in-
vestors exposed to QE increased their holdings of BBB-rated bonds, 
especially those issued by prospective fallen angels. Section 4 docu-
ments that prospective fallen angels benefited from a bond financing 
subsidy during QE. Section 5 discusses the sizable increase in M&A 
activity of prospective fallen angels. Section 6 quantifies the subsidy en-
joyed by prospective fallen angels and discusses its spillovers. Section 7 
concludes.

2. Theoretical framework and data

We now (i) discuss our conjecture on how the exorbitant privi-
lege can arise in equilibrium due to the sluggishness of credit ratings 
and the presence of an IG threshold—and especially during the QE-
induced rebalancing of investors’ portfolios (Section 2.1), (ii) present 
our data (Section 2.2), and (iii) introduce our definition of downgrade-
vulnerable firms (Section 2.3).

2.1. Theoretical framework

Our explanation for the origin of the exorbitant privilege relies on 
the interplay between two factors. First, a large demand for BBB-rated 
bonds—the highest yielding, yet IG-rated, corporate bonds. Second, the 
sluggishness of credit rating agencies in downgrading issuers, especially 
from IG to speculative grade, after M&A. The intuitive discussion in this 
section is based on a formal model presented in the online appendix.

Consider the portfolio choice of an investor that is subject to a 
regulatory capital requirement. Its optimal portfolio allocation trades-
off discounted expected cash flows with their capital requirements. 
More practically, a particularly appealing asset is one with high dis-
counted expected cash flows and a low regulatory capital requirement. 
In the context of the corporate bond market, capital requirements are 
predominantly  driven  by  credit  ratings:  as  the  credit  ratings  of  its 
bond holdings deteriorate, an investor needs to comply with increased 
capital requirements. For several types of investors, this dynamic is 
highly non-linear at the investment-grade threshold. Some investors 
(e.g., insurance companies) face substantially higher capital require-
ments for holding speculative-grade compared with investment-grade 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

bonds.  Some  other  investors  (e.g.,  investment-grade  mutual  funds), 
while not facing substantially higher capital requirements, voluntarily 
restrict their holdings to IG-rated bonds only. These investors are thus 
forced to sell bonds issued by firms that become fallen angels, bearing 
the associated liquidation costs.

By  lowering  yields  on  government  bonds  and  mortgage-backed 
securities,  and  especially  at  the  long  end  of  the  curve  (‘‘flattening 
shock’’), QE induces in these IG-focused investors a preference for a 
particular type of IG bond, namely the one rated BBB. In particular, 
investors such as life insurers seek out a greater quantity of high-yield, 
yet IG-rated, assets (BBB-rated bonds) to meet their promised liabilities 
(e.g., variable annuities with minimum guarantees) since yields, as well 
as quantities of their traditional investments, are compressed by the 
Federal Reserve in QE programs (Gagnon et al., 2011; Krishnamurthy 
and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011). This mechanism is consistent with anec-
dotal evidence. For example, the Financial Times on February 21, 2019, 
reports that ‘‘insurance companies such as AIG and MetLife hold huge 
investment books, mainly consisting of bonds, to back the promises they 
make to their customers. Over the past decade, they have increasingly moved 
into riskier assets, according to Fitch, as yields in safer categories have fallen 
under aggressive easing policies from the world’s central banks’’.

This QE-induced demand for higher yield and capital-efficient BBB 
bonds is met, in equilibrium, by an increased issuance, mostly with the 
goal of financing M&A, by BBB-rated firms at risk of being downgraded. 
These large issuance volumes serve two purposes. On the one hand, 
issuers  benefit  from  the  low  financing  costs—possibly  the  intended 
consequence of QE. On the other hand, by engaging in M&A, these 
issuers delay a potential downgrade, thus maintaining their precious IG 
status. This effect is rooted in an often overlooked friction, namely the 
sluggishness of credit rating agencies in downgrading issuers, especially 
to speculative grade, after M&A. In a way, even if value-destroying, 
M&A is a technology that issuers can use to ensure that their issuance 
is met by the continued high demand for BBB-rated bonds, as the post-
M&A sluggishness of credit ratings lowers investors’ expected capital 
charge over their holding period. The net effect of these factors at play 
is that QE results in a bond market subsidy — heightened demand or 
lower equilibrium spreads (relative to risk) — for prospective fallen 
angels.

There is an interesting parallel between such QE-induced capital 
misallocation and the zombie-lending related credit misallocation. In 
the latter, banks extend subsidized credit to distressed firms to gamble 
for resurrection and/or to not recognize them as nonperforming assets 
(which would induce higher provisioning and capital requirements). 
In the former, each investor such as an insurance firm can be consid-
ered relatively atomistic; nevertheless, the sluggishness of credit rating 
downgrades can act as a coordinating mechanism whereby each such 
investor can search for yield to gamble over the ‘‘cliff risk’’ of IG to 
sub-IG downgrade. Materialization of the cliff risk may be associated 
with liquidation costs, in case of investors restricted to investing in 
IG, and/or higher capital requirements, in case of investors such as 
insurance companies.

2.2. Data

Our main data set consists of firm-level, bond-level, and investor-
level data from 2009 to 2019, described in detail in the online ap-
pendix. The firm-level data includes debt capital structure data, balance 
sheet  information,  rating  information,  and  information  about  M&A 
activity. The debt capital structure data is from WRDS Capital IQ, which 
provides information for over 60,000 public and private companies 
globally. The balance sheet data is from Compustat North America, 
which provides annual report information of listed American and Cana-
dian firms. Rating information is from Refinitiv Eikon, which provides 
worldwide  coverage  on  ratings  from  S&P,  Moody’s,  and  Fitch.  We 
follow Becker and Milbourn (2011) in mapping ratings into numerical 

4 

V.V. Acharya et al.

values (see Table OA.2 in the online appendix). Lastly, we use Thom-
sonOne for mergers and acquisitions data. Combining these various 
data sources, we analyze 6145 firms. Our sample consists of firms that 
are incorporated in the U.S. and excludes financial firms that have a 
SIC-code between 6000-6999.

The  bond-level  data  set  consists  of  pricing  information  for  the 
U.S. corporate bond market. For the primary market, we use Mergent 
Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD), which includes issue details 
of publicly-offered U.S. bonds. We examine 6329 bond issues by 886 
issuers. For the secondary market, we obtain data from TRACE database 
of real-time secondary market information on transactions in the cor-
porate bond market. We examine 6116 outstanding bonds issued by 
863 firms. To compute primary and secondary market corporate bond 
spreads, we follow (Gilchrist and Zakrajšek, 2012) and compute the 
spread relative to the yield on a synthetic U.S. Treasury with the same 
cash flows as the corporate bond. In addition, we follow (Faust et al., 
2013) and further adjust the spreads of callable bonds to account for 
the influence of risk-free rates on the option value of these bonds. In 
our analysis of the COVID-19 crisis, we extend our data set to 2020.

The investor-level data is from eMAXX Bond Holders data from 
Refinitiv. This data set — used by, among others, Becker and Ivashina 
(2015), Bretscher et al. (2022), and Cai et al. (2019) — shows security-
level holdings by individual investors at a quarterly frequency. We 
match eMAXX with the Federal Reserve’s security-level holdings in the 
SOMA portfolio (this data is publicly available on the website of the 
New York Fed). We further match this data with issuer- and security-
level data from the rest of our analysis and collapse holdings within 
an investor at the issuer-level. The investor-level data has information 
on 7253 investors, mostly property and casualty insurers (28%), open-
ended mutual funds (25%), (other) life and health insurers (16%), and 
insurers with annuities with minimum guarantees (9%). The investor-
level data covers around 20%–25% (depending on the date and rating 
category) of the stock of corporate bonds outstanding.

2.3. Identifying prospective fallen angels

In this section, we introduce our definition of downgrade-vulnerable 
firms  and  document  the  realized  fragility  of  BBB-rated  downgrade-
vulnerable firms during COVID-19.

Downgrade-vulnerable firms.  We define ‘‘downgrade-vulnerable’’ firms 
based on the Altman Z’’-score, a measure of credit risk calculated from 
income statement and balance sheet information (Altman, 2020). The 
Altman Z’’-score is defined as:

𝑍ε = 3.25 + 6.56 ×

𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟. 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 − 𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟. 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠
𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

+ 3.26

+ 1.05

𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠
𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

+ 6.72

𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇
𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑉 𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠

Specifically, we classify a firm as downgrade-vulnerable if its Z’’-score 
is lower than the historical median Z’’-score of the next lowest rating 
category.3 For example, a BBB-rated firm is classified as downgrade-
vulnerable if its Z’’-score is below the median Z’’-score of BB-rated 
firms. A ‘‘prospective fallen angel’’ is a BBB-rated firm classified as 
downgrade-vulnerable.

We  validate  our  measure  of  downgrade-vulnerability  in  several 
ways. First, we show that downgrade-vulnerable firms are more likely 

3 We thank Ed Altman for providing us with these median ‘‘benchmark’’ Z’’-
scores for each rating category. The bond rating equivalents are determined 
by  calibrating  the  Z’’-scores  to  median  values  of  each  of  the  S&P  rating 
categories for various years over the last 50 or more years (Altman, 2020). For 
a discussion on Z’’-models, we refer to Altman (2018), Altman et al. (2019).

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

to be downgraded and to be assigned a negative credit watch rela-
tive to non-downgrade-vulnerable firms. Second, we show that BBB-
rated downgrade-vulnerable firms appear to be treated favorably by 
rating  agencies  compared  to  other  downgrade-vulnerable  firms.  In 
addition,  (i)  in  Table   A.1,  we  show  that  the  probability  of  being 
downgraded is higher for downgrade-vulnerable firms compared with 
non-downgrade-vulnerable firms in various sub-periods of our sample 
period; and (ii) in the online appendix OA.3, we show that downgrade-
vulnerable firms look worse along observables compared with non-
downgrade-vulnerable firms (e.g., lower net worth, sales growth, in-
vestments, employment growth, interest coverage ratio, profitability, 
and higher leverage) and firms’ performance deteriorates after becom-
ing downgrade-vulnerable (decline in sales growth, investments, firm 
size, and employment).

First, for the analysis of the probability of being downgraded or 

placed on a negative watch, we estimate the following specification:

𝑌𝑖𝑡+1 = 𝛽1Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜇ℎ𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡+1

(1)

where 𝑖 is a firm, ℎ an industry, and 𝑡 a year. Our dependent variable 𝑌
is a dummy equal to one in the case of a negative watch event in 𝑡, or a 
downgrade event in 𝑡 + 1. To qualify as a downgrade event, a firm must 
be downgraded by at least one rating category in year 𝑡 + 1, i.e., a firm 
that has a rating of A+, A, or A−is downgraded to at least BBB+. Vul-
nerable is a dummy equal to one if a firm is downgrade-vulnerable in 
period 𝑡 and 𝜇 are industry-year fixed effects. 𝑋 is a vector of controls, 
namely the log of total assets, leverage, and the interest coverage ratio.
Table  1 presents the estimation results. The first two columns show 
that a downgrade-vulnerable company in year 𝑡 is more likely to have 
a negative watch event in year 𝑡 or 𝑡+1. Similarly, the last two columns 
show that a downgrade-vulnerable firm has a higher probability to be 
downgraded by at least one rating category in the next year.

Second, we document a substantial and increasing ratings inflation 
for BBB-rated issuers which increased markedly after 2009 (Fig.  2, left 
panel), where ratings inflation is defined as the difference between 
the issuer credit rating notch (e.g., AA+, AA, AA−) and the credit 
rating notch implied by its Z’’-score for issuers that have a Z’’-score 
below the median of firms in the next lower rating category or zero 
otherwise. This evidence is consistent with (Bruno et al., 2016) that 
shows that Moody’s avoids downgrading issuers of corporate bonds 
that are close to losing their investment-grade status. In addition, the 
right panel of Fig.  2 shows that although downgrade-vulnerable firms 
are more likely to be downgraded in each rating bucket compared to 
their non-downgrade-vulnerable peers, this correlation is the weakest 
for BBB-rated issuers. These findings are consistent with other stud-
ies and anecdotal evidence on the sluggishness of rating agencies in 
downgrading BBB-rated firms to speculative grade.

Prospective fallen angels during COVID-19.  The downgrade vulnerability 
of BBB-rated firms, and especially prospective fallen angels, manifested 
itself during the COVID-19 pandemic. The volume of debt downgraded 
from BBB to speculative grade in just a few weeks at the beginning 
of 2020 was more than two times larger than the volume of similar 
downgrades during the entire Global Financial Crisis. Fig.  3 shows that, 
in 2020, the total debt of fallen angels amounted to an unprecedented 
$320 billion of which the vast majority was debt of firms classified 
as prospective fallen angels before the COVID shock.  This wave of 
fallen  angels  only  stopped  when  the  Federal  Reserve  expanded  its 
corporate buying program on April 9, 2020 to include those issuers 
downgraded from BBB to fallen angels between March 22, 2020 and 
April 9, 2020. Some examples of firms eligible for the program are Ford 
Motor, Macy’s, and Occidental Petroleum (S&P Global, 2020b), all of 
which are classified as prospective fallen angels in our data.

Furthermore, a formal test shows that BBB-rated firms with more 
inflated credit ratings experienced sharper increases in spreads in 2020. 
Specifically, we relate the degree of ratings inflation in 2020:Q1 with 
the change in firms’ bond spreads using the following specification: 

𝛥Spread𝑏𝑖 = 𝛽1Ratings Inflation𝑖 + 𝛽2𝑋𝑖 + 𝜙ℎ + 𝜖𝑏𝑖,

(2)

5 

V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table 1
Credit rating actions after being classified as downgrade-vulnerable. This table presents the estimation 
results from specification (1) for our sample of rated firms. The dependent variable Negative Watch is a 
dummy variable equal to one if a firm is placed on negative credit watch or outlook in year 𝑡. The dependent 
variable Downgrade is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is downgraded by at least one rating category 
in year 𝑡 + 1, i.e., a firm that has a rating of A+, A, or A−is downgraded to at least BBB+. Vulnerable is 
a dummy equal to one if a firm is downgrade-vulnerable in period 𝑡. Firm-level control variables are size 
(log of total assets), leverage, IC ratio, and profitability. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level and 
reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Negative watch
0.102***
(0.017)

  Vulnerable

  Size

  Leverage

  IC Ratio

  Profitability

  Industry-year FE
  Observations
  R-squared

✓

8506
0.251

Negative watch
0.046***
(0.017)
0.011*
(0.007)
0.350***
(0.056)
−0.000
(0.001)
−1.654***
(0.171)

✓

8426
0.295

Downgrade

0.024***
(0.006)

✓

9431
0.095

Downgrade 
0.018***  
(0.006)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.020
(0.015)
−0.000
(0.000)
−0.112**  
(0.050)

✓

9341
0.098

Fig. 2.  High and rising credit ratings inflation for BBB-rated issuers. This figure shows credit ratings inflation across rating categories. The left panel shows asset-weighted 
credit ratings inflation. Credit ratings inflation is equal to zero if an issuer has a Z’’-score above the median Z’’-score of firms in the next lower rating category, otherwise credit 
ratings inflation is calculated as the number of notches between the issuer’s credit rating notch (e.g., AA+, AA, AA−, A) and the credit rating notch implied by its Z’’-score. The 
right panel shows the sensitivity of downgrades of downgrade-vulnerable issuers relative to non-downgrade-vulnerable issuers by rating category. Specifically, the figure shows the 
estimated coefficient, 𝛽1, from the following regression specification estimated in each rating category separately: 𝑌𝑖𝑡+1 = 𝛽1𝑉 𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜇ℎ𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡+1, where 𝑖 is a firm, ℎ is 
an industry, 𝑡 is a year, 𝑌𝑖𝑡+1 is a dummy equal to one in the case of a downgrade event in 𝑡 + 1, 𝑉 𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑖𝑡 is a dummy equal to one if a firm is downgrade-vulnerable in period 
𝑡, 𝜇ℎ𝑡 are industry-year fixed effects, and 𝑋𝑖𝑡 is a vector of controls (log of total assets, leverage, and interest coverage ratio). Dashed lines delimit 95 percent confidence intervals, 
with standard errors clustered at the firm-level.

where  the  dependent  variable  is  the  change  in  secondary  market 
spread between January 2020 and March 2020 of bond 𝑏 of firm 𝑖, 
Ratings Inflation is the difference between the issuer rating at the start 
of 2020 and the implied rating based on the Altman Z’’-score, 𝑋 are 
firm (log) assets, and 𝜙 are industry fixed effects. Table  2 presents 
our  results.  The  first  column  shows  that  for  downgrade-vulnerable 
BBB firms, issuers with higher ratings inflation experienced a greater 
widening  of  their  spreads  in  the  first  months  of  the  pandemic.  In 
particular, a one-notch inflated issuer rating is on average associated 
with a 16 basis points increase in bond spreads for prospective fallen 
angels. In contrast, the second column shows that no such relationship 
exists for the other downgrade-vulnerable investment-grade firms.

We  interpret  this  episode  as  ex-post  evidence  of  the  increased 
vulnerability of BBB-rated firms, and of prospective fallen angels in 
particular, in conjunction with lack of such observed vulnerability for 
other IG ratings.

3. QE-driven demand by investment-grade investors

A testable prediction of the conceptual framework above is that 
investors exposed to the Federal Reserve QE programs drive the de-
mand for IG corporate bonds, especially those issued by prospective 

6 

Table 2
Change in spreads at the onset of COVID-19. This table presents 
estimation results from the bond-level regression (2) in the subsample 
of downgrade-vulnerable firms. The dependent variable is the change 
in secondary market spread between January 2020 and March 2020 
of  a  single  bond.  Ratings  Inflation  is  the  issuer  rating  at  the  start 
of 2020 minus the implied rating based on the Altman Z’’-score. The 
regression also includes log of assets of the firm and industry fixed 
effects. In the first column, the subsample consists of BBB-rated firms. In 
the second column, the subsample consists of non-BBB-rated investment-
grade firms. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level and reported 
in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

  Ratings Inflation

  Sample
  Industry FE
  Firm Controls
  Observations
  R-squared

𝛥Spread

16.245***
(6.103)
Vuln. BBB
✓
✓

699
0.501

𝛥Spread

1.099
(5.124)
Vuln. A-AAA 
✓
✓

380
0.478

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Fig. 3.  Risk materialization during COVID-19. This figure shows total debt down-
graded  from  BBB  to  speculative  grade  split  by  non-downgrade-vulnerable  issuers 
(blue) and downgrade-vulnerable issuers (red).  The vulnerability of the BBB mar-
ket materialized at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and was concentrated in 
downgrade-vulnerable issuers. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

fallen angels. This dynamic is particularly pronounced during QE and 
entirely  driven  by  investors  that  predominantly  hold  IG  bonds  and 
whose  portfolio  consists  of  mostly  long-term  bonds—which  are  the 
most affected by QE purchases.

The left panel of Fig.  4 shows that investors substituted holdings 
of Treasuries with holdings of corporate bonds during QE until the 
withdrawal of monetary accommodation with Quantitative Tightening 
(QT). The solid line shows the size of the Fed balance sheet and the 
dashed line shows investors’ holdings of corporate bonds as a share of 
the entire bond portfolio (Treasuries and corporate bonds). The share of 
corporate bonds held by investors increases markedly during QE, before 
decreasing at the time of QT from 2017 onward.

To formally analyze the preference for bonds issued by high-yield, 
yet IG, corporate bonds, we measure investor-level exposure to QE. 
To this end, we merge our granular holdings-level data with the Fed-
eral  Reserve  SOMA  holdings  data.  Investor  time-varying  (quarterly 
frequency) exposure to QE is defined as the share of investors’ total 
holdings of bond issues that are also held by the Federal Reserve in the 
SOMA Treasury portfolio, where holdings are weighted by the share 
of amounts outstanding held by the Federal Reserve. The idea is that 
investors with a larger share of their security holdings in bonds that are 
also held by the Federal Reserve at time 𝑡 are the ones more affected 
by QE. Formally, we define the variable QE Exposure as follows: 

QE Exposure𝑘𝑡 =

∑

𝑏(Holdings𝑏𝑘𝑡 × SOMA𝑏𝑡)
𝑏 Holdings𝑏𝑘𝑡

∑

(3)

where 𝑏 is a security, 𝑘 is an investor, and 𝑡 is a date. SOMA is the share 
of Treasury security 𝑏 outstanding held by the Federal Reserve at date 
𝑡. Holdings are the holdings of security 𝑏 held by investor 𝑘 at time 𝑡. 
This variable is calculated at a quarterly frequency. The right panel of 
Fig.  4 shows the time-series evolution of average QE Exposure.

Next, we analyze investors’ demand for bonds issued by prospective 

fallen angels by estimating the following specification: 

Holdings𝑖𝑘𝑡 = 𝛽1QE Exposure𝑘𝑡−1 × Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 + 𝜂𝑘𝑡 + 𝜇𝑖𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑘𝑡

(4)

where 𝑘 is an investor, 𝑖 is an issuer, and 𝑡 is a quarter. The dependent 
variable  is  holdings  (thousands  of  dollars)  by  investor  𝑘  in  year  𝑡
of bonds issued by issuer 𝑖. The independent variable of interest is 
the interaction between the lagged QE Exposure and Vulnerable, a 
dummy  equal  to  one  if  issuer  𝑖  is  downgrade-vulnerable  in  year  𝑡. 
Following Cohn et al. (2022), we estimate a fixed-effects Poisson model.

7 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

The coefficient of interest 𝛽1 captures whether investors more ex-
posed to QE hold more or less bonds issued by downgrade-vulnerable 
issuers compared with less exposed investors. In the most stringent 
specification with investor-time and issuer-time fixed effects, we are 
effectively comparing bonds, at time 𝑡, issued by the same issuer that 
are held by investors with a different QE exposure. Investor-time fixed 
effects, 𝜂, control for the potential differential portfolio choice by high- 
vs. low-exposure investors, with respect to downgrade-vulnerable and 
non-downgrade-vulnerable bonds, for reasons unrelated to QE. Issuer-
time fixed effects, 𝜇, control for the potentially different character-
istics of downgrade-vulnerable and non-downgrade-vulnerable bonds 
(e.g., issuance volume) that might interact with the portfolio choice of 
high- vs. low-exposure investors for reasons, again, unrelated to QE.

Table  3 shows the estimation results. In Panel A, the estimated 
coefficient 𝛽1 is positive and significant, suggesting that investors more 
exposed to QE have a higher demand for bonds issued by downgrade-
vulnerable issuers compared with less exposed investors. The last two 
columns successively add, as independent variables, the downgrade-
vulnerable dummy interacted with investors’ time-varying bond portfo-
lio maturity and maturity squared. Our coefficient of interest is stable 
and significant. This result suggests that differential corporate bond 
holdings by downgrade-vulnerability are not driven by variation in 
portfolio maturity over time for a given investor, but instead by the 
time-series variation in the exposure of investors’ portfolio to QE. We 
will, however, see below that, for a given exposure to QE, it matters 
whether  the  investor  on  average  has  a  longer  or  shorter  portfolio 
maturity.

In Panel B, we show sample splits based on issuer ratings. In the 
four columns, the estimation is run in the sub-sample of AAA/AA, A, 
BBB, and speculative-grade issuers, respectively. The results show that 
the overall effect is more pronounced in BBB-rated bonds.

Table  4 shows the estimation results for holdings of BBB-rated bonds 
in various subsamples of investors. The first three columns include 
investors with a portfolio maturity of less than five years, between five 
and seven years, and more than seven years, at each date 𝑡, respectively. 
The last two columns only include investors with a portfolio maturity of 
more than seven years. The fourth column only includes investors with 
a share of IG securities of less than 75% at each date 𝑡. The last column 
only includes investors with a share of IG securities of at least 75% at 
each date 𝑡. These estimation results show that the results in Table  3 
are driven by investors holding a long-maturity portfolio and predom-
inantly investment-grade securities. These findings are consistent with 
QE reducing long-term yields and the BBB threshold affecting primarily 
those investors that mostly hold IG bonds.

The  investors  most  represented  in  our  sample  are  property  and 
casualty insurers (28%), open-ended mutual funds (25%), (other) life 
and health insurers (16%), and insurers with annuities with minimum 
guarantees (9%). As shown at the bottom of Table  4, variable annu-
ities with minimum guarantees hold the longest maturity portfolio—in 
addition  to  being  extremely  exposed  to  QE.  Other  life  and  health 
insurers also hold a long maturity portfolio but are less exposed to 
QE as their liabilities do not induce as much preference for risk as 
variable annuities do. Property and casualty insurers are highly exposed 
to QE but hold a somewhat short-term portfolio, mostly made of IG 
securities.4 These observations are related to (i) Koijen and Yogo (2021, 
2022) that document the fragility of such products in a low interest rate 
environment and how the minimum return guarantees have changed 
the primary function of life insurers from traditional insurance to fi-
nancial engineering; and (ii) Fringuellotti and Santos (2022) that shows 
that insurance companies have almost nonupled their investments in 
CLOs post-GFC, largely driven by IG-rated mezzanine debt tranches of 
CLOs. Finally, open-ended mutual funds have a moderate exposure to 

4 See Table OA.10 in the online appendix for summary statistics by investor 

type for the main types of investors in our data.

V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Fig. 4.  Investors’ holdings and QE. This figure analyzes the interaction between investors’ bond holdings and QE using a balanced sample of investors. The left panel shows 
the size of the Fed balance sheet (solid line) and investors’ holdings of corporate bonds as a share of corporate bonds and Treasuries (dashed line). The right panel shows the 
evolution of the cross-sectional mean of the QE Exposure variable. This variable is defined as the share of investors’ total holdings of bonds that are also held by the Federal 
Reserve in the SOMA Treasury portfolio, where holdings are weighted by the share of amounts outstanding held by the Federal Reserve.

Table 3
Demand for bonds issued by prospective fallen angels. This table presents Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood estimation 
results from specification (4). The unit of observation is investor 𝑘 - issuer 𝑖 - date 𝑡. The dependent variable is holdings by 
investor 𝑘 in year 𝑡 of corporate bonds issued by issuer 𝑖 (thousands of dollars). QE Exposure is defined in (3). Vulnerable is 
a dummy equal to one if issuer 𝑖 is downgrade-vulnerable at date 𝑡. Maturity is the maturity (in years) of the bond portfolio 
of investor 𝑘 at time 𝑡 (maturity is divided by 100 in this table for readability). The uninteracted Vulnerable and QE exposure 
terms are included in the estimation but not reported for brevity. In Panel A, the specification is estimated in the full sample 
of investors. In Panel B, the specification is estimated in the full sample of investors and in the subsample of issuers based on 
their rating category. Standard errors are double clustered at the investor-level and issuer-level and reported in parentheses. 
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Holdings

  Panel A
  QE Exposure × Vulnerable

  Maturity × Vulnerable

  (Maturity)2 × Vulnerable

  Fixed Effects
  Issuer
  Investor
  Time
  Investor-time
  Issuer-time
  Sample investors
  Sample issuers
  Observations
  Pseudo R-squared

2.942***
(0.818)

2.803***
(0.785)

2.905***
(0.873)

2.729***
(0.819)

2.715***
(0.817)
−0.026***
(0.008)

✓
✓
✓

Full
Full

✓

✓

Full
Full

✓

✓

Full
Full

✓
✓

Full
Full

✓
✓

Full
Full

6,594,994
0.773

6,571,075
0.795

6,593,753
0.784

6,569,837
0.805

6,569,799
0.805

2.715***  
(0.817)
−0.024
(0.023)
−0.000
(0.000)

✓
✓

Full
Full
6,569,799 
0.805

  Panel B
  QE Exposure × Vulnerable

  Fixed Effects
  Investor-time
  Issuer-time
  Sample investors
  Sample issuers
  Observations
  Pseudo R-squared

Holdings

0.588
(0.808)

✓
✓

Full
AAA/AA

397,259
0.892

2.589**
(1.041)

3.310***
(1.127)

✓
✓

Full
A

✓
✓

Full
BBB

1,387,882
0.846

2,316,423
0.812

−0.406
(0.928)

✓
✓

Full
HY
1,343,930 
0.820

QE, while also holding a long-term portfolio not too concentrated in the 
IG market. It is interesting to note that during the COVID-19 outbreak, 
debt mutual funds experienced significant redemptions and contributed 
to corporate bond fire sales (see, among others, Haddad et al., 2021 
and Falato et al., 2021a).

4. The exorbitant privilege

Having documented the role of QE in driving investors’ demand 
for  bonds  issued  by  prospective  fallen  angels,  we  now  show  that 

this demand is priced in corporate bond yields and that QE driven 
demand affects bond issuance. First, in Section 4.1, we document the 
extraordinarily low bond financing costs of prospective fallen angels 
since 2009, which we call the ‘‘exorbitant privilege’’. We find that 
this  subsidy  emerges  with  QE  and  diminishes  with  the  withdrawal 
of monetary stimulus through QT. Second, in Section 4.2, we show 
that the yields of these bonds are affected by the QE exposure of the 
investors holding them. Third, in Section 4.3, we show that the bond 
issuance of prospective fallen angels is also affected by the QE exposure 
of the investor base.

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table 4
Demand for bonds issued by prospective fallen angels, sample splits. This table presents Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood estimation 
results from specification (4). The unit of observation is investor 𝑘 - issuer 𝑖 - date 𝑡. The dependent variable is holdings by investor 𝑘 in year 
𝑡 of corporate bonds issued by issuer 𝑖 (thousands of dollars). QE Exposure is defined in (3). Vulnerable is a dummy equal to one if issuer 𝑖 is 
downgrade-vulnerable at date 𝑡. The uninteracted Vulnerable and QE exposure terms are included in the estimation but not reported for brevity. 
All the regressions are estimated in the subsample of BBB-rated issuers. In the first three columns, the results are estimated in the subsample of 
investors with a portfolio maturity below five years, between five and seven years, and above seven years, respectively. In the fourth column, 
the results are estimated in the subsample of investors with a portfolio maturity above seven years and with a share of investment-grade bonds 
smaller than 75%. In the fifth column, the results are estimated in the subsample of investors with a portfolio maturity above seven years 
and with a share of investment-grade bonds greater than 75%. Standard errors are double clustered at the investor-level and issuer-level and 
reported in parentheses. The bottom panel shows, for each investor type, the share of investors that, as of 2016:Q4, have a given bond portfolio 
duration and a given share of IG bonds. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

  QE Exposure × Vulnerable

Holdings

0.647
(0.902)

2.248***
(0.792)

3.653***
(1.231)

2.425***
(0.811)

✓
✓

✓
✓

  Fixed Effects
  Investor-time
  Issuer-time
  Observations
  Pseudo R-squared
  Sample issuers
  Sample investors (portfolio duration)
  Sample investors (portfolio IG rating share)
  Share of investors (by type) with a given portfolio duration and IG rating share in 2016
  Share of Annuities
  Share of Life & Health Insurance
  Share of Property & Casualty Insurance
  Share of Open Ended Mutual Fund

BBB
(5Y,7Y)
Full

17%
35%
57%
28%

17%
17%
21%
17%

454,540
0.813

417,289
0.825

BBB
< 5Y
Full

✓
✓

1,444,113
0.810

BBB
> 7Y
Full

66%
48%
21%
55%

✓
✓

780,214
0.796

BBB
> 7Y
< 0.75

26%
22%
6%
22%

3.736*** 
(1.335)  

✓
✓
663,726  
0.838

BBB
> 7Y
> 0.75

40%
25%
15%
33%

4.1. Low bond financing costs for prospective fallen angels

To describe the time-series evolution of the exorbitant privilege, Fig. 
5  plots  the  difference  in  secondary  market  spreads  between
downgrade-vulnerable  and  non-downgrade-vulnerable  BBB-rated  is-
suers as well as those rated AAA-A and BB. The difference in the spread 
between  downgrade-vulnerable  and  non-downgrade-vulnerable  BBB-
rated firms is (i) generally positive until the GFC; (ii) largely negative
during the QE-to-QT period; and (iii) almost always smaller than the 
same difference for the AAA-A and BB segments, which by and large 
tends to be positive.

Table OA.5 in the online appendix shows non-parametrically that, 
within each rating category, secondary market spreads of bonds issued 
by downgrade-vulnerable firms are higher than those issued by non-
downgrade-vulnerable  firms  across  the  rating  distribution.  The  one 
exception is the BBB segment where downgrade-vulnerable firms have
lower spreads in 2009–19.

Parametric test.  We confirm the emergence of this privilege for prospec-
tive fallen angels in bond markets using a formal test that compares the 
bond spreads of downgrade-vulnerable and non-downgrade-vulnerable 
firms within a rating category:

Spread𝑏𝑖𝑡 =𝜷𝟏𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡 + 𝜷𝟐Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 × 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡

+ 𝜹𝐗𝑏𝑡 + 𝜸Liquidity𝑏𝑡 × 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡 + 𝝁ℎ𝑡 + 𝜖𝑏𝑖𝑡

(5)

where Spread is the spread (in basis points) of bond 𝑏 issued by firm 𝑖 in 
period 𝑡. We reiterate that we follow (i) Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) 
and compute spreads relative to the yield on a synthetic Treasury with 
the same cash flows as the corporate bond and (ii) Faust et al. (2013) to 
further adjust the spreads of callable bonds to account for the influence 
of risk-free rates on the option value of these bonds. As Becker et al. 
(2021) shows, changes in credit quality can also influence the spread 
on bonds with a call option. Hence, we include control variables to 
absorb  the  influence  of  changes  in  credit  quality  on  callable  bond 
spreads by adding an indicator variable for callable bonds, another 
for bonds which are trading above par but below a price of 105 as 
well  as  the  interaction  of  the  two.5 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠  is  a  vector  of  dummy 

Fig. 5.  Bond spreads: downgrade-vulnerable minus non-downgrade-vulnerable 
issuers.  This  figure  shows  the  difference  in  secondary  market  spreads  between 
downgrade-vulnerable and non-downgrade-vulnerable issuers for issuers rated AAA, AA 
and A (dashed line), BBB (solid line), and B (dotted line), controlling for year-month 
fixed effects and bond-level controls for remaining maturity, offering amount, coupon, 
and dummy variables for convertible, senior, callable bonds, bonds with a price above 
par but below a price of 105, and the interaction between the latter two variables to 
account for changes in credit quality affecting spreads on callable bonds.

variables corresponding to firm 𝑖’s rating in period 𝑡 and Vulnerable is 
an indicator variable equal to one if issuer 𝑖 is classified as downgrade-
vulnerable in year 𝑡 − 1 and year 𝑡 and retains the same rating across 
both years.

We also (i) include a vector 𝐗 of bond-level characteristics (remain-
ing maturity, log of the offering amount, and dummy variables taking 
the value of one for bonds with covenants, convertible bonds, and 

5 As shown in Table OA.5 in the online appendix, around 90% of bonds 
in our sample are callable. Since 2010, this share has remained relatively 
constant.  Our  estimated  regression  coefficient  suggests  that,  when  trading 
close to the call barrier, callable bonds trade at a 40 basis point discount to 
non-callable bonds, an estimate not far from the one in Becker et al. (2021).

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table 5
The exorbitant privilege of prospective fallen angels. Panel A shows the estimation results from specification (5). Panel B 
shows the estimation results of specification (6). The dependent variables in Panel A are the secondary market bond spread 
(first three columns) and the primary market bond spread (last three columns). The dependent variable in Panel B is the 
one-day change in the secondary market spread. Bond spreads are measured in basis points. Vulnerable is a dummy variable 
equal to one if issuer 𝑖 is downgrade-vulnerable in date 𝑡−1 and 𝑡. Flattening Shock is the change in the slope of the yield curve 
multiplied by minus one (i.e., 2-year minus 10-year yield on Treasury futures contracts) in a 30 min event window around 
monetary policy announcements. The specific periods are: Full sample, January 2009 to December 2019; QE1-QT, January 
2009 to September 2017; QT, October 2017 to September 2019. QE events are defined as monetary policy announcements 
containing specific information about QE purchases (see Table OA.9 in the online appendix for details on the specific dates). 
Additional bond-level controls are residual maturity, log of amount outstanding, and bid–ask spreads. Coefficients on the 
latter are allowed to vary by rating. The specification also includes dummy variables for bonds with covenants, convertible 
bonds, senior bonds, callable bonds, bonds with a price above par but below a price of 105, and the interaction between 
the latter two variables to account for changes in credit quality affecting spreads on callable bonds. These control variables 
are included in the estimation but not reported for brevity. Also omitted for brevity are the coefficients on the uninteracted 
ratings. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and year-month level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** 
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

0.000
(0.000)  
9.739
(25.317) 
−15.252 
(9.148)  
18.476  
(27.200) 
0.000
(0.000)  
QT

✓
✓

455
0.867

  Panel A
  Vulnerable × AAA-AA

  Vulnerable × A

  Vulnerable × BBB

  Vulnerable × BB

  Vulnerable × B

  Sample period
  Industry-year-month FE
  Bond-level controls
  Observations
  R-squared

Secondary market spread
10.471**
(4.129)
4.975
(3.477)
−5.457**
(2.632)
19.056***
(5.534)
25.102***
(8.925)
Full sample
✓
✓

✓
✓

11.964**
(5.197)
7.376*
(3.761)
−7.752**
(3.067)
22.620***
(6.152)
33.684***
(8.572)

QE1-QT

243,162
0.731

179,527
0.730

4.769
(4.600)
−1.259
(4.805)
2.032
(3.338)
10.066
(9.164)
−44.704*
(23.693)

QT

✓
✓

53,721
0.760

  Panel B
  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × AAA

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × AA

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × A

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × BBB

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × BB

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × B

  Sample period
  Industry-year-month FE
  Bond-level controls
  Observations
  R-squared

𝛥 Secondary market spread
0.162∗∗
0.091
(0.091)
(0.080)
−0.106
−0.061
(0.099)
(0.051)
0.039
0.029
(0.034)
(0.030)
−0.075∗∗
−0.060∗∗
(0.031)
(0.029)
0.081
0.023
(0.099)
(0.081)
0.105
0.155
(0.459)
(0.448)
Full sample
✓
✓

QE1-QT

✓
✓

157,451
0.191

132,599
0.189

Primary market spread
22.980
(19.691)
17.736*
(10.090)
−19.273**
(9.246)
48.487***
(15.515)
63.488**
(24.905)
Full sample
✓
✓

✓
✓

15.854
(19.602)
24.365**
(11.865)
−19.928*
(11.701)
50.241***
(17.170)
64.010**
(25.407)

QE1-QT

2481
0.866

2026
0.870

0.121∗
(0.060)
0.068∗∗∗
(0.012)
0.020
(0.035)
−0.115∗∗∗
(0.017)
−0.013
(0.105)
−0.057
(0.309)
QE events
✓
✓

26,742
0.205

1.186  
(0.781) 
0.017  
(0.056) 
−0.001 
(0.062) 
0.015  
(0.037) 
−0.084 
(0.196) 
−0.667 
(0.384) 
QT

✓
✓
22,028  
0.257  

senior bonds, respectively, in addition to the controls for callable bonds 
described above) and (ii) control variables to capture the influence of 
bond liquidity on spreads by adding bid–ask spreads which we allow to 
vary by rating bucket, Liquidity × 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠. Finally, industry-year-month 
fixed effects 𝜇 absorb the unobserved time-variation in spreads within 
an industry. Due to the few bonds having a rating of AAA, we combine 
AAA-rated and AA-rated firms into one category.

Table  5 presents the estimation results. The first three columns of 
Panel  A  show  the  estimation  results  for  secondary  market  spreads. 
The first column shows results estimated over the full sample period. 
The interaction terms between ratings and the downgrade-vulnerable 
firm dummy variable show that in all rating categories, except BBB, 
downgrade-vulnerable firms have either higher financing costs (AAA-
AA, BB, B ratings) or statistically indistinguishable financing costs (A 
rating) compared with non-downgrade-vulnerable firms. In Table OA.6 
in the online appendix, we show the estimates of the uninteracted 
rating variables. These results are robust to using bond instead of issuer 
ratings (Table OA.7 in the online appendix) and to further controlling 

for bond liquidity with the number of times a bond is traded within 
a month or whether the bond is a newly issued on-the-run bond, or a 
seasoned off-the-run issue (Table OA.8 in the online appendix).

The  second  column  shows  that,  in  the  subsample  covering  the 
QE  era  from  QE1  to  QT  (January  2009  to  September  2017),  the 
Vulnerable × BBB coefficient is negative, statistically significant, and 
larger compared to the full sample (2009–19). The third column shows 
that the privilege disappears from secondary markets in the QT period 
(October 2017 to September 2019). In additional tests, we find that the 
difference in the Vulnerable × BBB coefficients in the QE1-to-QT period 
is significantly different from that in the QT period.

The  final  three  columns  of  Panel  A  present  the  estimation  re-
sults  using  primary  market  offering  spreads  as  the  dependent  vari-
able. Notwithstanding the smaller sample of observations relative to 
secondary market spreads, the estimates again indicate a downgrade-
vulnerable BBB funding subsidy. By contrast, downgrade-vulnerable 
firms in other rating buckets have higher spreads. In the QT period, 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

the subsidy of prospective fallen angels diminishes in magnitude and 
becomes statistically insignificant.

Event study.  We further examine the privilege for prospective fallen 
angels with an event study by estimating the following specification:

𝛥 Spread𝑏𝑖𝑡 =𝜷𝟏𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡 + 𝜷𝟐Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 × 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡

+ 𝜷𝟑𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡 × Flattening Shock𝑡
+ 𝜷𝟒Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 × 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡 × Flattening Shock𝑡

+ 𝜹𝐗𝑏𝑡 + 𝜸Liquidity𝑏𝑡 × 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡 + 𝜇ℎ𝑡 + 𝜖𝑏𝑖𝑡

(6)

where 𝛥 Spread is the one-day change in the corporate bond spread 
(in basis points) of bond 𝑏 issued by firm 𝑖 in period 𝑡. To capture 
the influence of QE events, we compute the variable Flattening Shock, 
defined as the change in the slope of the yield curve multiplied by 
minus one (i.e., 2-year minus 10-year yield on Treasury futures con-
tracts)—capturing the QE-induced drop in long-term yields. This shock 
to  the  yield  curve  is  computed  within  a  −15  to  +  15  min  event 
window around monetary policy announcements or, for press confer-
ences  and  release  of  minutes,  with  a  slightly  longer  window,  from 
−15 to + 90 min, as these communications are more extensive and 
contain broader information which may take longer for investors to 
process. The monetary policy announcement dates are from (Cieslak 
and Schrimpf, 2019), updated up until the end of 2019.

Panel B of Table  5 presents the event study estimates. The negative 
and significant coefficient on the Vulnerable × BBB × Flattening Shock
variable in the first column shows that bond spreads of downgrade-
vulnerable  BBB-rated  firms  declined  relative  to  non-downgrade-
vulnerable  BBB-rated  firms  when  the  yield  curve  flattened  around 
monetary policy announcements. In quantitative terms, a 100 basis 
point flattening of the yield curve leads to a 6 basis point decline in the 
bond spreads of BBB downgrade-vulnerable issuers. The second column 
shows that this effect was larger for the QE period.

The third column of Panel B further confirms the specific influence 
of QE. It does so by constraining the event study to only monetary 
policy announcements with specific information about QE purchases. 
We classify 33 out of the 171 monetary policy announcements be-
tween 2009 and 2019 as being ‘‘QE-specific’’ (see Table OA.9 in the 
online appendix for details on the specific events). Just focusing on 
these events results in a 50% increase in the point estimate of the 
Vulnerable × BBB × Flattening Shock coefficient, with the statistical sig-
nificance increasing to a 𝑝-value <0.001. By contrast, the fourth column 
shows that, during QT, shocks to the yield curve slope did not have 
significant effects on the spread between downgrade-vulnerable and 
non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms. Taken together, the results 
in Table  5 suggest that the exorbitant privilege of prospective fallen 
angels emerged with QE and diminished with the Federal Reserve’s 
withdrawal of unconventional monetary stimulus.

Exorbitant privilege uniquely a bond market phenomenon.  Table  6 shows 
that  this  privilege  is  unique  to  the  corporate  bond  market  in  the 
QE era. The first two columns use, as dependent variables, the (log) 
expected default frequency (EDF) derived from equity markets at the 2-
year and 5-year horizon, respectively. While the estimated coefficients 
on the uninteracted terms increase monotonically as ratings deterio-
rate, downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms have significantly higher 
EDFs compared to their non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated peers, as 
shown by the positive and significant Vulnerable × BBB coefficient. 
This result suggests that the exorbitant privilege is not present in equity 
markets. Rather, equity markets view downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated 
firms as riskier than their non-downgrade-vulnerable peers. Note that, 
given the limited number of observations in the AAA and AA rating 
buckets (especially in the syndicated loan market data), we combine 
AAA-A ratings into a single rating category.

The third column shows that prospective fallen angels did not enjoy 
a  similar  funding  advantage  in  the  syndicated  loan  market  during 
this  period.  The  Vulnerable × BBB  coefficient  is  positive  (although 

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

not statistically significant), suggesting that loan markets tended to 
perceive these firms to be riskier than non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB-
rated firms. The fourth column shows that, in the last business cycle 
before the GFC (2002-07), prospective fallen angels did not benefit 
from a funding privilege in the corporate bond market. If anything, they 
paid higher spreads in this period, in line with other rating categories. 
That  being  said,  it  is  possible  that,  in  this  period,  corporate  bond 
investors might have reached for yield in other asset classes, such as 
MBS.

However, the fifth column suggests that credit default swap markets 
may have priced a similar, though smaller, privilege for prospective 
fallen angels. The point estimate of the Vulnerable × BBB interaction 
term is negative at around a fifth of the magnitude of our baseline 
specification  in  Table   5  Panel  A.  This  result  is  consistent  with  the 
growing  evidence  that  the  CDS  market  essentially  appears  to  be  a 
substitute for corporate bond markets (Oehmke and Zawadowski, 2015; 
Jager and Zadow, 2022).6

Taken together, these results suggest that the exorbitant privilege of 
prospective fallen angels is unique to corporate bonds (and replication 
markets such as CDS).

4.2. QE exposure and the exorbitant privilege

We now show that the yields of bonds issued by prospective fallen 
angels are in part affected by the QE exposure of the investors holding 
them.

To this end, we define a measure of indirect QE exposure at the 
issuer-quarter level. In each quarter 𝑡 and for each issuer 𝑖, we calculate 
the weighted average of the exposure to QE of 𝑖’s investors, where the 
weights are the holdings that each investor 𝑘 owns in 𝑖, namely:
𝑘 QE Exposure𝑘𝑡Holdings𝑖𝑘𝑡
𝑘 Holdings𝑖𝑘𝑡

QE Exposure𝑖𝑡 =

∑

∑

We  then  add  this  measure  as  an  independent  variable  in  speci-
fications (5) and (6). Fig.  A.1 documents the increasing indirect QE 
exposure of BBB-rated firms during our period.

Table  7 shows that the exorbitant privilege of prospective fallen 
angels is in part explained by their indirect exposure to QE. Panel 
A shows the estimation results based on adding the issuers’ indirect 
QE  exposure  to  specification  (5),  where  the  dependent  variable  is 
the secondary market spread. The negative and significant coefficient 
on the QE exposure variable in Column (1) shows that issuers with 
greater QE exposure (via their investors) enjoyed, on average, lower 
secondary market bond spreads. In other words, QE-induced portfolio 
rebalancing is associated with a lowering of bond spreads. The second 
column shows that, once we include the indirect QE exposure variable 
in specification (5), the coefficient on Vulnerable × BBB is no longer 
statistically significant and falls by about 25% of its magnitude in Table 

6 Our  interpretation  is  that  the  drivers  of  the  prospective  fallen  angel 
privilege also influence the pricing of CDS contracts. In particular, an investor 
can gain credit exposure to a firm by either buying the bond or through a 
replication strategy of selling a CDS contract on the same firm and buying a 
Treasury. Two pieces of evidence suggest that the same influence in corporate 
bond markets also affects CDS markets. First, for insurance companies, whose 
participation in investment-grade CDS markets is particularly relevant given 
the significantly higher capital requirements for speculative-grade risks, the 
capital  treatment  of  selling  CDS  in  a  replication  strategy  is  the  same  as 
holding a corporate bond of the same rating according to the risk-based capital 
regulation  issued  by  the  National  Association  of  Insurance  Commissioners 
(NAIC). Second, replication strategies overwhelmingly account for insurance 
company exposure in CDS markets (around 75%), see for example (NAIC, 
2015). Finally, BIS Derivative Statistics (TableD10.1) also show that insurance 
companies have been net sellers of CDS protection on non-financial corporates 
to dealers between 2009 and 2019, the same directional position as being long 
corporate bonds.

11 

V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table 6
The exorbitant privilege is unique to the corporate bond market post-2009. This table shows the estimation results of specification (5). 
This table provides robustness checks on the downgrade-vulnerable BBB subsidy in different markets and time periods. Vulnerable is a dummy 
variable equal to one if issuer 𝑖 is downgrade-vulnerable in date 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡. The dependent variables in the first two columns are the log of the 
2-year and log of the 5-year expected default frequency between 2009 to 2019. The dependent variable in the third column is the all-in-drawn 
spread for syndicated loans from DealScan. The dependent variable in the fourth column is the secondary market bond spread in the pre-GFC 
period (2002-07). The dependent variable in the fifth column is the spread on the CDS contract maturity matched to the corporate bond sample 
in Panel A of Table  5. The CDS contracts are interpolated to have the same remaining maturity as the corresponding bond. The specifications 
include industry-year-month fixed effects (2-digit SIC). The first two columns are at the firm-level, so we do not include bond-level controls but 
control for firm size. Loan-level controls included in the third column are maturity, loan size, and dummy variables for dividend restrictions 
and for agent consent in trading the loan. Controls included in the fourth column are residual maturity, amount outstanding, coupon, firm size, 
bid–ask spreads; coefficients on the latter variable are allowed to vary by rating. The specification also includes dummy variables for bonds 
with covenants, convertible bonds, senior bonds, callable bonds, bonds with a price above par but below a price of 105, and the interaction 
between the latter two variables to account for changes in credit quality affecting spreads on callable bonds. The last column includes maturity 
controls. These control variables are included in the estimation but not reported for brevity. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm 
and year-month level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
EDF 2Y
0.623***
(0.082)
1.528***
(0.104)
2.851***
(0.126)
4.211***
(0.219)
0.303**
(0.125)
0.220**
(0.100)
0.472***
(0.113)
0.661***
(0.128)

CDS
50.358***  
(5.038)
183.299*** 
(14.513)
435.137*** 
(33.402)
951.977*** 
(175.963)  
−3.275
(5.071)
−1.773
(5.180)
97.160***  
(23.784)
105.954
(92.551)

Loan spread
7.350
(16.390)
51.534**
(19.590)
114.606***
(20.325)
216.636***
(70.905)
−4.242
(24.623)
15.367
(10.106)
34.985**
(14.396)
46.086**
(18.966)

22.146***
(4.722)
88.018***
(8.113)
155.357***
(11.485)
306.994***
(62.100)
8.898**
(3.683)
9.221*
(5.422)
13.405*
(7.282)
29.766
(23.898)

EDF 5Y
0.494***
(0.065)
1.190***
(0.082)
2.188***
(0.099)
3.209***
(0.167)
0.236**
(0.102)
0.138*
(0.075)
0.339***
(0.085)
0.506***
(0.095)

  Vulnerable × AAA-A

  Vulnerable × BBB

  Vulnerable × BB

  Vulnerable × B

  CCC

  BBB

Spread

  BB

  B

  Industry-year-month FE
  Observations
  R-squared

✓

56,675
0.755

✓

56,675
0.780

✓

3009
0.713

✓

23,144
0.780

✓

145,145
0.740

5, Panel A, Column (1). As more liquid bonds may be valued more by 
investors switching portfolios from U.S. Treasuries, Table  A.2 further 
investigates if QE exposure had a differential influence on more liquid 
corporate bonds by including interactions of QE exposure with bond 
bid–ask spreads and firm size. The results suggest that QE exposure had 
a larger impact on spreads of more liquid bonds as measured by the 
bid–ask spread, but we do not find that QE exposure had a differential 
spread effect on bonds issued by larger firms.

The last two columns of Panel A show similar results for primary 
market bond spreads. The third column shows that issuers with greater 
indirect QE exposure enjoyed, on average, lower primary market bond 
spreads.  The  last  column  shows  that,  once  we  include  the  indirect 
QE exposure variable in specification (5), the point estimate on the 
Vulnerable × BBB coefficient falls again by about 25% of its value in 
Table  5, Panel A, Column (4), and its statistical significance falls from 
the 5% to the 10% level.

Table  7 Panel B confirms that the issuers’ indirect QE exposure is 
priced in bond yields using the event study specification (6). The first 
column examines how our measure of issuers’ indirect QE exposure 
influenced the reaction of bond spreads to monetary policy announce-
ments which flattened the yield curve. The negative and significant 
coefficient on the QE Exposure × Flattening Shock shows that firms 
with greater QE exposure experienced greater declines in bond spreads 
when  the  yield  curve  flattened  around  monetary  policy  announce-
ments. The second column shows that the coefficient on the triple in-
teraction of Vulnerable × BBB × Flattening Shock (which captures how 
monetary policy announcements lowered downgrade-vulnerable BBB-
rated  issuers’  bond  spreads)  becomes  statistically  insignificant  once 
we control for QE exposure, while the coefficient on QE Exposure ×
Flattening Shock is virtually unaffected relative to Column (1).

Taken together, these results indicate that QE exposure of issuers 
via their investors’ portfolios helps to explain the exorbitant privilege 
of prospective fallen angels.

4.3. QE exposure and bond issuance

We now show that the QE exposure of the investor base also affects 
the issuance of prospective fallen angels, which markedly increased 
in 2012 and progressively afterwards (Figure OA.7 in the online ap-
pendix)—mirroring the evolution of the Fed balance sheet documented 
in  Fig.   4.  To  this  end,  we  examine  the  influence  of  firms’  indirect 
exposure to QE on their bond issuance with the following specification:

Issuance𝑖𝑡 = 𝜷𝟏𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡 + 𝜷𝟐Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 × 𝐑𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠𝑖𝑡
+ 𝛾QE Exposure𝑖𝑡 + 𝜇ℎ𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡

(7)

where Issuance is either a dummy variable taking on the value of one 
if firm 𝑖 issues a bond in period 𝑡 or the total value of bonds issued in 
period 𝑡. We estimate a linear probability model for the former and a 
fixed-effects Poisson model for the latter.

Table   8  shows  that  firms  with  greater  indirect  exposure  to  QE 
are more likely to issue and issue more. The first column, where the 
dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating issuance, shows that 
issuers with greater QE exposure (via their investors) are more likely 
to issue bonds. The second column shows that this result continues 
to hold when including, as independent variables, issuer ratings and 
their interaction with our Vulnerable variable. The third and fourth 
columns, based on a fixed-effects Poisson model, show that firms with 
greater  QE  exposure  are  more  likely  to  issue  larger  amounts.  The 
economic magnitude of the effect of greater QE exposure on issuance is 
sizeable. For example, a one standard deviation increase in QE exposure 
increases the probability of issuing a bond from a mean probability of 
3% to a probability of about 4.5% in a month.

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table 7
Issuers’ QE exposure and the exorbitant privilege of prospective fallen angels. Panel 
A shows the estimation results of specification (5). Panel B shows the estimation results 
of specification (6). Both specifications also include the QE Exposure variable as an 
independent variable. The dependent variables in Panel A are the secondary market bond 
spread (first two columns) and the primary market bond spread (last two columns). The 
dependent variable in Panel B is the one-day change in the secondary market spread. 
Bond spreads are measured in basis points. Vulnerable is a dummy variable equal to 
one if issuer 𝑖 is downgrade-vulnerable in date 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡. QE Exposure is defined as 
the weighted average of the exposure to QE of issuer 𝑖’s investors, where the weights 
are the holdings that each investor 𝑘 owns in 𝑖. In Panel B, Flattening Shock is the 
change in the slope of the yield curve multiplied by minus one (i.e., 2-year minus 10-
year yield on Treasury futures contracts) in a 30 min event window around monetary 
policy announcements. Additional bond-level controls include residual maturity, amount 
outstanding, and bid–ask spreads. Coefficients on the latter are allowed to vary by rating. 
The specification also includes dummy variables for bonds with covenants, convertible 
bonds, senior bonds, callable bonds, bonds with a price above par but below a price of 
105, and the interaction between the latter two variables to account for changes in credit 
quality affecting spreads on callable bonds. These control variables are included in the 
estimation but not reported for brevity. Also omitted for brevity are the coefficients on 
the uninteracted ratings. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and year-month 
level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

  Panel A
  Vulnerable × AAA-AA

  Vulnerable × A

  Vulnerable × BBB

  Vulnerable × BB

  Vulnerable × B

  QE Exposure

  Industry-year-month FE
  Bond-level controls
  Observations
  R-squared

Secondary market spread

Primary market spread

9.008**
(3.996)
6.649*
(3.489)
−3.872
(2.567)
17.854***
(5.529)
24.049***
(8.839)
−11.980***
(2.253)

✓
✓

243,162
0.733

−13.345***
(2.248)

✓
✓

243,162
0.730

17.260
(19.431)
22.197**
(10.464)
−15.886*  
(9.377)
45.641***  
(14.876)
62.992**
(24.954)
−19.369*** 
(6.919)

✓
✓

2481
0.867

−22.730***
(6.950)

✓
✓

2481
0.862

  Panel B
  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × AAA

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × AA

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × A

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × BBB

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × BB

  Vulnerable × Flattening Shock × B

  QE Exposure × Flattening Shock

  QE Exposure

  Industry-year-month-day FE
  Bond-level controls
  Observations
  R-squared

𝛥 Secondary market spread
0.178∗∗∗
(0.043)
−0.061
(0.044)
0.043∗∗∗
(0.005)
−0.039
(0.024)
0.008
(0.078)
0.131
(0.322)
−0.187∗∗
(0.076)
0.073
(0.189)

−0.193∗∗
(0.074)
0.058
(0.188)

✓
✓

157,451
0.190

✓
✓

157,451
0.191

Taken together, the results in this section and in the previous one 
suggest that firms more exposed to QE via their investors benefited 
from lower bond spreads and were more likely to issue bonds.

5. M&A as an equilibrium response to investor demand

In this section, we discuss how the sizable increase in M&A activity 
of downgrade-vulnerable firms (and prospective fallen angels in partic-
ular) appears to be an equilibrium response to the QE-induced demand 
for bonds by IG-focused and long-duration investors. The core of our 
argument is that M&A, mostly debt-funded, allows issuers to meet the 

high demand for IG bonds, while delaying an eventual downgrade given 
that credit ratings are extremely sluggish in the few years after M&A 
deals, a dynamic unique to the BBB rating category.

Section 5.1 shows the increase in M&A activity by prospective fallen 
angels. Section 5.2 documents the sluggishness of credit rating agencies 
in downgrading post-M&A. Section 5.3 shows ex-ante evidence link-
ing M&A and the increased vulnerability of prospective fallen angels. 
Section 5.4 shows that the unprecedented wave of fallen angels in 
March 2020 was almost entirely driven by prospective fallen angels 
that engaged in M&A, confirming its role in enhancing leverage and, 
therefore, credit risk.

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Fig. 6.  M&A activity, BBB-rated issuers. This figure shows M&A activity by BBB-rated issuers. The left panel shows deal volume for downgrade-vulnerable issuers. The right 
panel shows deal volume for non-downgrade-vulnerable issuers.

Table 8
Issuers’ QE exposure and bond issuance. This table shows the estimation results of 
specification (7). The dependent variable in the first two columns is a dummy variable 
taking on the value of one if firm 𝑖 issues a bond in period 𝑡. These specifications are 
estimated with a linear probability model. The dependent variable in the third and 
fourth columns is the amount issued by a firm in period 𝑡. These specifications are 
estimated using a fixed-effects Poisson model. QE Exposure is defined as the weighted 
average of the exposure to QE of issuer 𝑖’s investors, where the weights are the holdings 
that each investor 𝑘 owns in issuer 𝑖. Vulnerable is a dummy variable equal to one 
if issuer 𝑖 is downgrade-vulnerable in date 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡. In columns two and four, 
the coefficients on the uninteracted ratings dummy variables are omitted for brevity. 
Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and year-month level and reported in 
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

D(Issuance)

Issuance amount

  Vulnerable × AAA-AA

  Vulnerable × A

  Vulnerable × BBB

  Vulnerable × BB

  Vulnerable × B

  QE Exposure

  Industry-year-month FE
  Observations
  R-squared
  Pseudo R2

0.034*
(0.019)
0.021*
(0.011)
0.008
(0.006)
0.013**
(0.006)
0.003
(0.007)
0.021***
(0.004)

✓

59,883
0.120

0.017***
(0.003)

✓

59,883
0.118

0.555**  
(0.261)  
0.278*  
(0.154)  
0.179
(0.126)  
0.384*** 
(0.134)  
0.078
(0.163)  
0.535*** 
(0.077)  
✓
30,019  

0.431***
(0.062)

✓

30,019

0.126

0.133

5.1. The increase in M&A

Prospective fallen angels drive the surge in M&A activity in the 
BBB market. The left panel of Fig.  6 shows that M&A deal volumes 
of prospective fallen angels increased substantially. This increase coin-
cides with the rise in the share of corporate bond holdings in investors’ 
portfolios (Fig.  4). The right panel shows that the increase is less pro-
nounced for the non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms. In Figure 
OA.8 in the online appendix, we additionally show that the substantial 
increase in investment-grade bond issuance was in large part to fund 
M&A activity.

5.2. The sluggishness of credit ratings post-M&A

A crucial part of the exorbitant privilege mechanism is the slug-
gishness  of  downgrades  after  M&A.  One  way  of  demonstrating  the 
post-M&A sluggishness is to examine whether our measure of ratings 
inflation is higher for BBB-rated downgrade-vulnerable firms, especially 
following M&A. To this end, we estimate the following specification in 
the subsample of downgrade-vulnerable firms: 

𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽1BBB𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2M&A𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3M&A𝑖𝑡 × BBB𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜂ℎ𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡

(8)

Table 9
The role of M&A in prolonging ratings inflation. This table presents estimation 
results  from  specification  (8)  in  the  sample  of  downgrade-vulnerable  firms.  The 
dependent variable is ratings inflation—calculated as the number of notches between 
the issuer’s credit rating notch (e.g., AA+, AA, AA−, A) and the credit rating notch 
implied by its Z’’-score. M&A is a dummy variable equal to one for the year and 
the years after a firm has conducted M&A. The specifications include industry-year 
fixed effects and firm-level controls (log of total assets, leverage, interest coverage 
ratio, and profitability). Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level and reported in 
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

  BBB

  M&A

  M&A × BBB

  M&A × Size

  BBB × Size

  Size

  Industry-year FE
  Controls
  Sample
  Observations
  R-squared

Ratings inflation
0.443**
(0.202)

Ratings inflation
0.060
(0.283)
−0.357*
(0.200)
0.666**
(0.306)

0.164**
(0.072)

✓
✓

0.173**
(0.073)

✓
✓

Ratings inflation 
−1.900
(1.191)
0.021
(0.953)
0.624**
(0.302)
−0.040
(0.106)
0.209*
(0.121)
0.127
(0.091)

✓
✓

Vulnerable

Vulnerable

Vulnerable

2424
0.380

2424
0.386

2424
0.389

where 𝑖 is a firm, ℎ an industry, and 𝑡 a year. The dependent variable is 
ratings inflation, defined as the number of notches between the issuer’s 
credit rating notch and the credit rating notch implied by its Z’’-score. 
The key independent variable is the interaction between BBB and M&A, 
where M&A is a dummy equal to one in the year firm 𝑖 has conducted 
an M&A deal and for the years thereafter. BBB is a dummy equal to one 
if firm 𝑖 has a BBB rating in 𝑡. X represents a set of firm controls (log 
of assets, leverage, interest coverage ratio, and profitability), and 𝜂 are 
industry-year fixed effects.

Table  9 shows the estimation results. The first column suggests that 
prospective fallen angels enjoy an additional 0.5 notches in ratings 
inflation compared with downgrade-vulnerable issuers in other rating 
groups. The second column shows that, within downgrade-vulnerable 
firms, ratings inflation is largely driven by firms that have undertaken 
an M&A and is in fact higher at 0.6 notches. This M&A ratings infla-
tion is, however, only enjoyed by prospective fallen angels. The third 
column confirms this result is robust to including additional firm size 
interactions with the BBB rating and M&A variables.

An alternative way to examine post-M&A ratings sluggishness is to 
examine ratings transition matrices. These matrices confirm that M&A 
deals are associated with sluggishness of credit ratings. Fig.  7 shows 
two ratings transition matrices, reporting the debt-weighted share of 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Fig. 7.  The sluggishness of credit ratings post-M&A. This figure shows the debt-weighted share (in %) of firms transitioning across issuer rating groups (AAA/AA, A, BBB, and 
BB and below) in one calendar year. The left matrix includes only firms without an M&A transaction within the past two years. The right matrix includes only firms within a 
two-year period after an M&A transaction. The one-year transition probabilities are measured for the years 2011 to 2018, to account for the 𝑡 − 2 M&A lag and to exclude the 
COVID-19 period.

issuers transitioning across rating groups. The left matrix only covers 
firms without an M&A transaction in the past two years, while the right 
matrix only includes firms that have conducted an M&A transaction 
in the past two years. The left matrix shows that in the non-M&A 
sample, 8.9 percent of A-rated firms are typically downgraded to BBB 
and that 3.0 percent of BBB-rated firms are typically downgraded to 
BB and below. By contrast, the right matrix shows that after M&A, the 
downgrade probability of BBB rated firms falls to 0.6 percent, but rises 
for all other IG-rating groups. Fig.  A.2 confirms that this sluggishness 
of credit ratings downgrades at the IG cutoff after M&A transactions is 
particularly pronounced among downgrade-vulnerable firms.

This fact is consistent with anecdotal evidence as well as a large 
body of practitioners’ research pieces which note that the announce-
ment of an M&A deal is almost always accompanied by rosy forecasts of 
synergies that will reduce costs and increase revenues and, even more 
importantly, a leverage-reduction plan. For example, Morgan Stanley 
(2018a) states that ‘‘...M&A has driven big increases in leverage and BBB 
debt outstanding. And while these companies may pledge to delever over 
time, those promises often don’t materialize..’’. And, again, Morgan Stanley 
(2018b) writes that ‘‘...forward-looking assumptions often assume all goes 
well and earnings growth is strong. In reality, issuers have been slow to 
actually delever...’’ In sum, these plans promise to reduce the debt taken 
on to finance the acquisition in an attempt to convince credit rating 
agencies about the issuer’s future prospects. Figure OA.10 in the online 
appendix shows that these promises are often broken, consistent with 
market participants’ observations.

Note that, while ratings inflation is higher for prospective fallen 
angels (especially after M&A), Fig.  A.3 and Figure OA.9 in the online 
appendix show that the sluggishness of credit ratings after M&A van-
ishes over time as, over the medium term, firms that engage in M&A 
— and especially downgrade-vulnerable ones — are more likely to be 
downgraded compared to firms that did not engage in M&A. Together 
with the ex-post evidence in Section 5.3, these results suggest that the 
Altman Z’’-score is an effective predictor, even for firms after an M&A 
deal.

5.3. M&A and the vulnerability of prospective fallen angels

We now provide ex-ante evidence linking M&A activity with in-
creased vulnerability. In particular, we show that prospective fallen 
angels (i) engage in relatively larger M&A transactions compared to 
other rated firms, (ii) substantially increase their total debt without 
a comparable increase in profitability post-M&A, and (iii) experience 
negative cumulative abnormal returns around the M&A announcement 
date (unlike non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated issuers).

Table 10
M&A and risk-taking by prospective fallen angels. This table presents estimation 
results from specification (9) in the sample of rated firms that announced an M&A. 
The dependent variable in the first column is the relative deal size, which is measured 
by the total M&A transaction value of a firm in a given year over its lagged assets. The 
dependent variable in the second column is net debt/EBITDA. For the first two columns 
the firm-level controls consist of log of assets, profitability, leverage, and tangibility. 
The third column presents the 5-day cumulative abnormal returns for the M&A deals 
performed by firms in our sample, for which we run the specification on a deal-level. 
The total return value-weighted index is used as benchmark over a −210 to −11 day 
period. Control variables include the log of total assets, leverage, profitability, and in 
column (3), additionally, an indicator variable for whether the deal is at least partially 
financed with stock, an indicator variable for whether the target has the same 2-digit 
SIC code as the acquirer, an indicator variable for whether the deal is cross-border, 
an indicator variable for a publicly listed target, and the pre-deal buy-and-hold returns 
of the acquirer from −210 to −11 days. A t -test shows that on average the CARs 
of BBB-rated downgrade-vulnerable firms are −1 percent. In all columns, Vulnerable 
is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is downgrade-vulnerable in period 𝑡. 
BBB is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm has a BBB rating in period 𝑡. All 
specifications are in the sample of firm-years with positive total transaction value and 
include industry-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level and 
reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

  BBB

  Vulnerable

  Vulnerable × BBB

  Controls
  Industry-year FE
  Sample
  Level
  Observations
  R-squared

Relative Deal Size
−0.043***
(0.013)
−0.038**
(0.017)
0.056**
(0.027)

Net Debt/EBITDA
−0.124
(0.116)
−0.097
(0.170)
0.365*
(0.210)

✓
✓
M&A Rated
Firm

1,829
0.268

✓
✓
M&A Rated
Firm

2950
0.535

CARs

0.001
(0.003)
0.005
(0.004)
−0.012**  
(0.006)

✓
✓
M&A Rated 
Deal

2412
0.198

Specifically, we estimate the following specification in the sample 

of firms which announced an M&A in year 𝑡: 

𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽1BBB𝑖𝑡 +𝛽2Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 +𝛽3Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 ×BBB𝑖𝑡 +𝛿𝑋𝑖𝑡 +𝜂ℎ𝑡 +𝜖𝑖𝑡, (9)

where 𝑖 is a firm, ℎ is an industry, and 𝑡 is the year of the M&A. 
𝑌   measures  either  the  relative  deal  size,  net  debt/EBITDA,  or  the 
cumulative  abnormal  return  (CAR).  The  coefficient  of  interest,  𝛽3, 
captures the effect of M&A by prospective fallen angels relative to 
other downgrade-vulnerable firms and non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB 
firms. We include industry-year fixed effects to absorb time-varying 
industry-level heterogeneity and time-varying firm-level controls.

The  first  column  of  Table   10  shows  that  the  M&A  deal  size  of 
prospective  fallen  angels  is  larger.  The  second  column  shows  that, 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Fig. 8.  Downgrade materialization of (prospective) fallen angels. This figure shows the total debt of downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms that has been upgraded and 
downgraded in the years from 2011 to 2020. The downgraded debt is grouped according to downgrade severity. The downgrade severity is measured by the number of notches 
a firm is being downgraded by, and is subdivided into three broad categories: 0.5–1, 1.5–2, and > 2 notches, as reflected by the green shades. The upgraded debt is shown by 
the orange bars, and is represented by the notches below zero. The left panel plots the total amount of up/downgraded debt for downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms that have 
conducted an M&A since the year that they have become downgrade-vulnerable. The right panel shows the total amount of up/downgraded debt for firms that have not conducted 
an M&A since the year that they have become downgrade-vulnerable.

as a result, net debt to EBITDA rises after prospective fallen angels 
announce an M&A. The same dynamic is not evident in M&A’s of other 
downgrade-vulnerable firms. Finally, the third column shows that only 
M&A deals by prospective fallen angels are associated with negative 
CARs, suggesting that their M&A activity is value-destroying. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that M&A activity contributed to a 
buildup of vulnerabilities among prospective fallen angels.

5.4. Fallen angels at the onset of COVID-19: The role of M&A

This vulnerability of prospective fallen angels materialized in just a 
few weeks at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, where the volume of 
BBB debt downgraded was more than two times larger than during the 
entire GFC. As Fig.  3 showed, prospective fallen angels accounted for 
the vast majority of fallen angel debt. Moreover, the debt downgraded 
from BBB to speculative grade in 2020 was almost entirely driven by 
prospective fallen angels that engaged in M&A. The green bar in the 
left panel of Fig.  8 shows that around $275 billion of prospective fallen 
angel debt was downgraded in 2020 by issuers which had undertaken 
M&As, while the right panel shows that those that had not done so 
amounted to less that $50 billion. The different shades indicate the 
severity of the downgrade (number of notches) showing that prospec-
tive fallen angels that had undertaken M&A were also downgraded by 
more notches.

6. The cost of the subsidy

Having established the magnitude of the subsidy in bond market 
financing costs of prospective fallen angels and the economic mech-
anisms driving it, we now quantify the overall bond market subsidy 
(Section 6.1) and examine the indirect economic cost that arises from 
spillovers to competing firms (Section 6.2).

6.1. Quantifying the subsidy for prospective fallen angels

In  this  section,  we  quantify  the  subsidy  enjoyed  by  prospective 
fallen angels. Our estimates range from around $43 to $120 billion 
during 2009 to 2019, depending on assumptions about their underlying 
risk.

The subsidy enjoyed by prospective fallen angels consists of two 
components. First, a within-rating component originating from the fact 
that prospective fallen angels pay lower bond financing costs com-
pared to non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms, as shown by our 
estimates in Table  5. The second ‘‘downgrade-avoidance’’ component 
originates from the fact that, by benefiting from delay to downgrades, 

prospective fallen angels avoid paying the much higher financing costs 
of speculative-grade issuers.7 This second component is measured by 
the difference in spreads between a non-downgrade-vulnerable BBB-
rated firm and a non-downgrade-vulnerable BB-rated firm. In the left 
panel  of  Fig.   9,  the  black  arrows  indicate  the  two  subsidy  compo-
nents for the downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms, using the offering 
spreads in the third columns of Table  5 Panel A and Table OA.6 in the 
online appendix.8 The sum of the two components results in a subsidy 
of 141 basis points.

The total subsidy in dollar terms that accrues to prospective fallen 
angels over the lifetime of their issued bonds can be computed by 
multiplying  the  spread  difference  of  141  basis  points  between  the 
downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms and non-downgrade-vulnerable 
BB-rated firms by the average bond duration and the total bond offering 
amount  of  prospective  fallen  angels  over  the  years  2009–19.  This 
calculation results in a subsidy estimate of $120 billion.

The above calculation implicitly assumes that the actual credit risk 
of prospective fallen angels is identical to that of the average non-
downgrade-vulnerable BB-rated firm. However, it is possible that this 
may  overstate  the  subsidy  because  of  remaining  unobserved  differ-
ences. We therefore complement our baseline subsidy estimate with 
two alternatives. In the right panel of Fig.  9, we provide an overview of 
our ballpark figures, which ultimately range from $43 billion to $120 
billion.  The  first  alternative  assumes  that  the  ‘‘true’’  counterfactual 
spread on downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated bonds can be inferred by 
interpolating  between  the  spreads  of  downgrade-vulnerable  A-rated 
and  downgrade-vulnerable  BB-rated  firms  (see  Figure  OA.12  in  the 
online appendix). Taking the yield differential between the prospective 
fallen angel spread and the linearly interpolated counterfactual spread 
implies a subsidy of 83 basis points, resulting in a total dollar subsidy 
of around $70 billion. The second approach assumes that actual firm 
risk is evident in equity prices and thus captured by the EDF. Using 
the log of 2-year EDF of prospective fallen angels and then backing out 
the counterfactual spread based on the relationship between the EDFs 
and the offering spreads of all other ratings categories with a quadratic 

7 Differences in the investor clientele and capital requirements between 
IG and speculative-grade segments drive a big wedge in funding costs. For 
example, insurance companies face risk-based capital requirements for their 
holdings of corporate bonds. These requirements are progressively steeper with 
credit ratings, especially if the IG threshold is crossed (link). The mapping from 
NAIC ratings designations and those of ratings agencies can be found at link.
8 We  are  grateful  to  our  NBER  Corporate  Finance  discussant,  Annette 

Vissing-Jorgensen, for this representation of the subsidy.

16 

V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Fig. 9.  Quantifying the prospective fallen angel subsidy. The left panel plots the offering spreads by credit rating from the third column of Table  5 Panel A and Table 
OA.6 in the online appendix for downgrade-vulnerable and non-downgrade-vulnerable issuers, and shows the downgrade avoidance and within-rating subsidy components for 
prospective fallen angels. The right panel presents a range of estimates for the total subsidy of prospective fallen angels in dollar terms based on alternative counterfactual spreads 
of prospective fallen angels. EDF: counterfactual spread based on firm risk measured by the log of 2-year EDFs. Interpolation: counterfactual spread based on linear interpolation 
between spreads of downgrade-vulnerable A-rated and downgrade-vulnerable BB-rated firms. Non-downgrade-vulnerable BB spread: counterfactual spread based on the offering 
spreads of non-downgrade-vulnerable BB-rated firms. The total dollar subsidy is computed as the difference of the counterfactual spread relative to the prospective fallen angel 
spread multiplied by the average duration and the total offering amount of bonds issued by prospective fallen angels between 2009 and 2019.

Fig. 10.  The increase in market share of prospective fallen angels. This figure shows the evolution of firm market shares. Firms are grouped by credit rating from A to BB 
and further distinguished between downgrade-vulnerable and non-downgrade-vulnerable within each rating.

function, we find that downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms receive a 
51 basis points subsidy and a total dollar subsidy of $43 billion (see 
Figure OA.12 in the online appendix).

6.2. Spillovers to competing firms

We next investigate possible spillovers from prospective fallen an-
gels to competing firms in a manner akin to the congestion externality 
documented in the context of zombie lending. Hence, we follow that lit-
erature (most notably Caballero et al., 2008) and estimate the following 
regression at the firm-year level:

𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽1Non-Vulnerable𝑖𝑡

Finally, we examine real economy spillovers from prospective fallen 
angels  to  competing  firms.  We  show  (i)  that  the  market  share  of 
prospective fallen angels increases substantially in our sample period 
and is largely driven by M&A, and (ii) that non-downgrade-vulnerable 
firms  are  negatively  affected  by  the  presence  of  prospective  fallen 
angels in their market.

Fig.  10 shows that the market share of prospective fallen angels 
increased in our sample period. The figure breaks down each rating cat-
egory into the downgrade-vulnerable and non-downgrade-vulnerable 
groups. The entire increase in BBB-rated issuers’ market share is driven 
by prospective fallen angels. Moreover, the increase in market share 
of BBB-rated firms has been driven largely by prospective fallen angels 
engaging in M&A (Figure OA.11 in the online appendix).

+ 𝛽2Non-Vulnerable𝑖𝑡 × Share Vulnerable BBBℎ𝑡−1 + 𝜂ℎ𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡,

(10)

where  𝑖  is  a  firm,  ℎ  is  an  industry,  and  𝑡  is  a  year.  The  depen-
dent variables are employment growth, investment, sales growth, and 
markups. We also include industry-year fixed effects. Our coefficient 
of interest, 𝛽2, captures whether non-downgrade-vulnerable firms that 
operate in industries with a high share of prospective fallen angels 
perform differently than non-downgrade-vulnerable firms in industries 
with a lower share of prospective fallen angels.

Table   11  reports  the  estimation  results.  Panel  A  shows  that,  in 
the  sample  of  rated  firms,  non-downgrade-vulnerable  IG  firms  are 
negatively affected by the presence of prospective fallen angels. More 
precisely,  the  first  two  columns  show  that,  while  non-downgrade-
vulnerable  firms  have  on  average  higher  employment  growth  rates 

17 

V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table 11
Negative spillovers on other firms. This table presents estimation results from specification (10). The dependent variables are employment 
growth, CAPX/PPE, sales growth, and markups (defined as sales/cost of goods sold). Vulnerable (and non-vulnerable) is defined in Section 2.2. 
Panel A focuses on the congestion effects of prospective fallen angels on non-downgrade-vulnerable investment-grade firms. The sample is 
limited to firms with a rating from at least one rating agency. Panel B focuses on the same sample as Panel A but examines the congestion 
effects of all downgrade-vulnerable firms. Panel C focuses on the congestion effects of prospective fallen angels on all non-downgrade-vulnerable 
firms using the entire sample of firms. Share Vulnerable BBB measures the asset-weighted share of prospective fallen angels in a two-digit SIC 
industry. Firm-level control variables are log of total assets, leverage, and net worth. Standard errors are clustered at the industry-level and 
reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Emp Growth

CAPX

Sales Growth

Markup  

  Panel A: Rated Firms - Vulnerable IG
  Non-Vulnerable IG

  Non-Vulnerable IG × Share Vulnerable BBB

  Observations
  R-squared
  Panel B: Rated Firms - Placebo
  Non-Vulnerable IG

  Non-Vulnerable IG × Share Vulnerable

  Observations
  R-squared
  Panel C: All Firms
  Non-Vulnerable

  Non-Vulnerable × Share Vulnerable BBB

  Observations
  R-squared
  Industry-year FE
  Firm-level controls

0.018*
(0.009)
−0.082**
(0.037)

7078
0.097

0.034*
(0.017)
−0.028
(0.031)

7078
0.106

0.043***
(0.011)
−0.074**
(0.035)

26,163
0.042

✓
✓

0.031***
(0.012)
−0.104**
(0.046)

7276
0.314

0.026*
(0.013)
−0.023
(0.021)

7276
0.313

0.043***
(0.010)
−0.098**
(0.043)

27,635
0.191

✓
✓

0.005
(0.009)
−0.086**
(0.036)

7284
0.258

0.025*
(0.015)
−0.037
(0.025)

7284
0.264

0.044***
(0.012)
−0.079***
(0.027)

27,142
0.045

✓
✓

0.589**  
(0.277)  
−1.555** 
(0.766)  
7283
0.257

0.344
(0.269)  
0.281
(0.320)  
7283
0.270

0.379**  
(0.172)  
−0.923** 
(0.434)  
27,035  
0.136

✓
✓

and invest more, both employment and investment are impaired by 
the presence of prospective fallen angels. Moreover, these firms face 
lower sales growth and lower markups compared with firms that do not 
compete with a large share of prospective fallen angels. To assess the 
economic magnitude of these spillover effects, consider a one standard 
deviation increase in the share of prospective fallen angels (0.136). 
This increase implies that non-downgrade-vulnerable investment-grade 
firms face 1.1pp lower employment growth, 1.4pp lower investment, 
and 1.2pp lower sales growth.

Panel B shows that these spillover effects are not present when we 
replace the share of prospective fallen angels with the overall share 
of  downgrade-vulnerable  firms.  This  result  confirms  the  uniqueness 
of prospective fallen angels, also when it comes to driving negative 
spillover  effects,  and  is  consistent  with  only  the  prospective  fallen 
angels  enjoying  the  bond  market  subsidy.  Besides  Caballero  et  al. 
(2008), these findings are also related to the recent literature on the 
misallocation of bank credit (Acharya et al., 2024; Blattner et al., 2023) 
and of other forms of financing (Midrigan and Xu, 2014; Whited and 
Zhao, 2021).

Panel C confirms our main results for the full sample of firms rather 
than just IG-rated firms. At the industry-level, Table  A.3 shows that 
the presence of prospective fallen angels increases both industry-level 
credit risk and concentration, and, with some delay, markups. This ev-
idence is consistent with industry-level markups eventually increasing 
as prospective fallen angels keep growing, along with industry-level 
concentration.

7. Conclusion

In summary, we document an exorbitant privilege in the form of 
a bond market borrowing cost subsidy for prospective fallen angels, 
namely firms on the cusp of the IG cutoff. This subsidy disappeared 
with the withdrawal of monetary stimulus and QT. We find the sub-
sidy to be driven by QE-induced demand for IG bonds of IG-focused 

Fig. A.1.  Rising QE exposure of BBB-rated issuers. This figure shows the indirect 
QE exposure of issuers — indirectly through their investors — across rating categories, 
weighted by total assets of the issuers. For each issuer, the indirect measure of QE 
exposure is calculated as the weighted average of the exposure to QE of the issuer’s 
investors, where the weights are the holdings that each investor owns of the issuer 
bonds. QE exposure by rating is then computed as the asset-weighted sum of issuers’ 
QE exposures in a given rating bucket and year.

and long-duration investors such as annuities. This demand, in turn, 
induces prospective fallen angels to engage in risky M&A, exploiting the 
sluggishness of credit rating agencies, in order to increase their market 
share with adverse spillovers on competing firms.

Our results suggest that although the growth of the IG bond segment 
may have been a desired consequence of QE, the resulting concentra-
tion of issuance in the riskiest IG (BBB) bucket also comes at a cost that 
may run counter to central bank objectives. First, the subsidized firms 
grow disproportionately large and become more fragile, as evidenced 
by the unprecedented wave of fallen angels that were downgraded 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Fig. A.2.  The sluggishness of credit ratings post-M&A, downgrade-vulnerable and non-downgrade-vulnerable firms. This figure shows the debt-weighted share (in %) of 
firms transitioning across issuer rating groups (AAA/AA, A, BBB, and BB and below) in one calendar year. The left matrices include only firms without an M&A transaction within 
the past two years. The right matrices include only firms within a two-year period after an M&A transaction. The top matrices only include non-downgrade-vulnerable firms. The 
bottom matrices only include downgrade-vulnerable firms. The one-year transition probabilities are measured for the years 2011 to 2018, to account for the 𝑡 − 2 M&A lag and to 
exclude the COVID-19 period.

Fig. A.3.  Credit ratings post-M&A over a longer time-frame. This figure shows the debt-weighted share (in %) of firms transitioning across issuer rating groups (AAA/AA, A, 
BBB, and BB and below) in three calendar years (𝑡 to 𝑡 + 3). The left matrix includes only firms without an M&A transaction within the past two years (𝑡 − 2 to 𝑡). The right matrix 
includes only firms within a two-year period after an M&A transaction (𝑡 − 2 to 𝑡). The three-year transition probabilities are measured for the years 2011 to 2023 to account for 
the 𝑡 − 2 M&A lag.

19 

V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table A.1
Credit rating actions after being classified as downgrade-vulnerable, subsample periods. This table presents the estimation results from 
specification (1) for our sample of rated firms, separately for different subsample periods: 2009–2010, 2011–2013, and 2014–2018. The dependent 
variable Downgrade is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is downgraded by at least one rating category in year 𝑡 + 1, i.e., a firm that 
has a rating of A+, A, or A−is downgraded to at least BBB+. Vulnerable is a dummy equal to one if a firm is downgrade-vulnerable in period 
𝑡. Firm-level control variables are size (log of total assets), leverage, IC ratio, and profitability. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level 
and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

  Vulnerable

  Size

  Leverage

  Interest Coverage

  Profitability

  Sample Period
  Industry-Year FE
  Observations
  R-squared

Downgrade

Downgrade

Downgrade

Downgrade

Downgrade

0.031**
(0.014)

0.026*
(0.014)
0.009***
(0.003)
0.008
(0.033)
−0.017
(0.023)
−0.098
(0.075)

0.032***
(0.011)

0.018***
(0.007)

0.024**
(0.012)
0.004
(0.003)
0.053*
(0.028)
0.025
(0.022)
−0.158**
(0.072)

2009–2010

2009–2010

2011–2013

2011–2013

2014–2018

✓

1654
0.071

✓

1633
0.076

✓

2518
0.106

✓

2494
0.115

✓

5259
0.095

Downgrade 
0.015**
(0.007)
0.001
(0.002)
0.005
(0.020)
−0.040**  
(0.019)
−0.037
(0.065)
2014–2018 
✓

5214
0.097

Table A.2
Issuers’ QE exposure and interactions with liquidity and firm size. This table shows 
the estimation results of specification (5) but additionally including interactions with 
the bond’s bid–ask spread and log of assets of the issuing firm. The dependent variable 
in each column is the secondary market bond spread. Bond spreads are measured in 
basis points. Vulnerable is a dummy variable equal to one if issuer 𝑖 is downgrade-
vulnerable in date 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡. Additional bond-level controls include residual maturity, 
amount outstanding, and bid–ask spread. Coefficients on the latter variable are allowed 
to vary by rating. The specification also includes dummy variables for bonds with 
covenants, convertible bonds, senior bonds, callable bonds, bonds with a price above 
par but below a price of 105 and the interaction between the latter two variables 
to account for changes in credit quality affecting spreads on callable bonds. These 
control variables are included in the estimation but not reported for brevity. These 
specifications include industry-year-month fixed effects (2-digit SIC). Standard errors 
are double clustered at the firm and year-month level and reported in parentheses. *** 
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

  Vulnerable × AAA-AA

  Vulnerable × A

  Vulnerable × BBB

  Vulnerable × BB

  Vulnerable × B

  QE Exposure

  QE Exposure × Bid–Ask Spread

  QE Exposure × Firm Size

  Firm Size

  Industry-Year-Month FE
  Bond-level controls
  Observations
  R-squared

Secondary market spread
8.934**
(4.002)
6.718*
(3.481)
−3.822
(2.566)
17.833***
(5.529)
24.030***
(8.834)
−13.160***
(2.253)
916.168***
(191.976)

9.232**
(4.010)
6.410*
(3.400)
−3.482
(2.586)
19.314***  
(5.589)
26.811***  
(9.495)
−18.412***  
(6.720)

1.515
(1.230)
−3.491
(2.126)

✓
✓

243,031
0.732

✓
✓

243,162
0.733

by  multiple  notches  at  the  onset  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  Sec-
ond, the resulting spillover effects force their competitors to reduce 
employment, investment, markups, and sales growth.

This  capital  misallocation  cost  of  QE  has  not  been  documented 
hitherto, to the best of our knowledge, and may need to be factored 
in while considering the desirability, scale, scope, and duration of QE 
interventions in the future. Equally, the financial vulnerability of (hith-
erto privileged) prospective fallen angels may have to be considered in 
the present discussions to normalize the size of central bank balance 

sheets following the extraordinary magnitude of the COVID-19 related 
QE programs. Indeed, the crash of IG-rating indices during 2022, which 
seems to have outpaced that of high-yield indices, suggests that the 
impact of central bank interventions on the pricing and issuance of IG 
corporate bonds during the post-pandemic period is worthy of careful 
scrutiny in future research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Viral V. Acharya: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Project  administration, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Ryan 
Banerjee: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visu-
alization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project admin-
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Matteo Crosignani: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Soft-
ware, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, 
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tim Eisert: Writing 
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Supervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. 
Renée Spigt: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visu-
alization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project admin-
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re-
lationships  which  may  be  considered  as  potential  competing  inter-
ests:  Tim  Eisert  reports  a  relationship  with  European  Bank  for  Re-
construction  and  Development  (EBRD)  that  includes:  consulting  or 
advisory.

Appendix. Additional figures and tables

See Figs.  A.1–A.3 and Tables  A.1–A.3.

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104084.

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Table A.3
Industry-level HHI, markups, and Z’’-score. This table presents the estimation results for a specification run at the industry-year level, where the 
dependent variables (at the industry-year level) are sales HHI (Panel A), sales-weighted markups (Panel B), and asset-weighted Altman Z’’-scores (Panel 
C). The variable Share Vulnerable BBB is the asset-weighted share of downgrade-vulnerable BBB-rated firms in an industry-year. The industry is the 
SIC2 code. All specifications include industry fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry-level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, 
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
  Panel A
  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡

HHI

HHI

HHI

HHI

0.064***
(0.022)

0.054***
(0.018)
0.026
(0.023)

0.056***
(0.019)
0.024
(0.019)
0.012
(0.016)

0.064***
(0.020)
0.011
(0.022)
0.017
(0.020)
0.007
(0.024)

HHI
0.058***  
(0.019)
0.022
(0.024)
0.002
(0.020)
0.020
(0.018)
−0.016
(0.037)

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−1

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−2

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−3

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−4

  Industry FE
  Observations
  R-squared
  Panel B
  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−1

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−2

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−3

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−4

  Industry FE
  Observations
  R-squared
  Panel C
  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−1

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−2

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−3

  Share Vulnerable BBB𝑡−4

  Industry FE
  Observations
  R-squared

✓

682
0.918

Markup

0.005
(0.128)

✓

622
0.896
Altman Z’’
−1.562***
(0.313)

✓

620
0.923

Markup

−0.044
(0.103)
0.020
(0.097)

✓

564
0.898
Altman Z’’
−1.466***
(0.331)
−0.476
(0.441)

✓

558
0.932

Markup

0.001
(0.069)
−0.026
(0.100)
−0.036
(0.071)

✓

505
0.906
Altman Z’’
−1.362***
(0.414)
−0.535*
(0.309)
−0.377
(0.432)

✓

660
0.143

✓

600
0.136

✓

540
0.130

✓

496
0.935

Markup

−0.012
(0.067)
−0.019
(0.075)
−0.143
(0.107)
0.205**
(0.089)

✓

448
0.915
Altman Z’’
−1.377***
(0.384)
−0.456
(0.283)
−0.654
(0.461)
0.190
(0.297)

✓

480
0.125

✓

434
0.937

Markup

0.040
(0.067)
−0.072
(0.077)
−0.118
(0.078)
0.168**
(0.068)
0.134
(0.096)

✓

390
0.930
Altman Z’’ 
−1.206**  
(0.484)
−0.591*  
(0.319)
−0.655**  
(0.307)
−0.019
(0.222)
−0.022
(0.329)

✓

420
0.120

Data availability

Exorbitant Privilege? Quantitative Easing and the Bond Market Subsid
y of Prospective Fallen Angels? (Reference data) (Mendeley Data).

References

Acharya,  V.,  Crosignani,  M.,  Eisert,  T.,  Eufinger,  C.,  2024.  Zombie  credit  and 

(dis-)inflation: Evidence from Europe. J. Financ. 79 (3), 1883–1929.

Acharya, V., Eisert, T., Eufinger, C., Hirsch, C., 2019. Whatever it takes: The real effects 

of unconventional monetary policy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (9), 3366–3411.

Acharya, V., Steffen, S., 2020. The risk of being a fallen angel and the corporate dash 

for cash in the midst of COVID. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 9 (3), 430–471.

Ahmed, A., Hofmann, B., Schmitz, M., 2022. Foreign institutional investors, monetary 

policy, and reaching for yield. Work. Pap..

Aktas,  N.,  Petmezas,  D.,  Servaes,  H.,  Karampatsas,  N.,  2021.  Credit  ratings  and 

acquisitions. J. Corp. Financ. 69, 101986.

Altman, E.I., Hotchkiss, E., Wang, W., 2019. Corporate Financial Distress, Restructuring, 
and Bankruptcy: Analyze Leveraged Finance, Distressed Debt, and Bankruptcy. John 
Wiley & Sons.

Baghai, R., Becker, B., Pitschner, S., 2022. The use of credit ratings in financial markets. 

Working Paper.

Becker, B., Campello, M., Thell, V., Yan, D., 2021. Credit Risk and the Life Cycle 
of  Callable  Bonds:  Implications  for  Corporate  Financing  and  Investing.  CEPR 
Discussion Papers 16239, URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/cpr/ceprdp/16239.html.
Becker, B., Ivashina, V., 2015. Reaching for yield in the bond market. J. Financ. 70 

Becker, B., Milbourn, T., 2011. How did increased competition affect credit ratings? J. 

(5), 1863–1902.

Financ. Econ. 101 (3), 493–514.

Blackrock,  2020.  Assessing  risks  in  the  BBB-rated  corporate  bond  market. 
URL  https://www.blackrock.com/institutions/en-us/insights/investment-actions/as
sessing-risks-in-bbb-corporate-bonds. (Online, Accessed 18 August 2020).

Blattner, L., Farinha, L., Rebelo, F., 2023. When losses turn into loans: The cost of 

weak banks. Am. Econ. Rev. 113 (6), 1600–1641.

Boyarchenko, N., Crump, R., Kovner, A., Shachar, O., 2022. Measuring Corporate Bond 

Dislocations. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports No. 957.

Bretscher, L., Schmid, L., Sen, I., Sharma, V., 2022. Institutional Corporate Bond Pricing. 

Working Paper.

Altman, E.I., 2018. A fifty-year retrospective on credit risk models, the altman Z-
score family of models and their applications to financial markets and managerial 
strategies. J. Credit. Risk 14 (4).

Altman, E.I., 2020. COVID-19 and the credit cycle. J. Credit. Risk 16 (2), 1–28.

Bruno, V., Cornaggia, J., Cornaggia, K.J., 2016. Does Regulatory Certification Affect 

the Information Content of Credit Ratings? Manag. Sci. 62 (6), 1578–1597.

Caballero,  R.J.,  Hoshi,  T.,  Kashyap,  A.K.,  2008.  Zombie  lending  and  depressed 

restructuring in Japan. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (5), 1943–1977.

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.V. Acharya et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104084 

Cai, F., Han, S., Li, D., Li, Y., 2019. Institutional herding and its price impact: Evidence 

Iannotta, G., Pennacchi, G., Santos, J., 2019. Ratings-based regulation and systematic 

from the corporate bond market. J. Financ. Econ. 131 (1), 139–167.

risk incentives. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (4), 1274–1415.

Çelik, S., Demirtas, G., Isaksson, M., 2020. Corporate Bond Market Trends, Emerging 

Jager, M., Zadow, F., 2022. Clear(ed) decision: The effect of central clearing on firms’ 

Risks and Monetary Policy. OECD Capital Market Series, Paris.

financing decision. Working Paper.

Cieslak, A., Schrimpf, A., 2019. Non-monetary news in central bank communication. J. 

Koijen,  R.S.J.,  Yogo,  M.,  2021.  The  evolution  from  life  insurance  to  financial 

engineering. Geneva Risk Insur. Rev. 46, 89–111.

Int. Econ. 118, 293–315.

Financ. Econ. 146, 529–552.

Cohn, J.B., Liu, Z., Wardlaw, M.I., 2022. Count (and count-like) data in finance. J. 

Koijen, R.S.J., Yogo, M., 2022. The fragility of market risk insurance. J. Financ. 77 (2), 

Cornaggia, J., Cornaggia, K., 2013. Estimating the costs of issuer-paid credit ratings. 

Darmouni,  O.,  Giesecke,  O.,  Rodnyansky,  A.,  2021.  The  bond  lending  channel  of 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 26 (9), 2229–2269.

monetary policy. Working Paper.

815–862.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. The effects of quantitative easing on 
interest rates: Channels and implications for policy. Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity.

Kubitza, C., 2021. Investor-driven corporate finance: Evidence from insurance markets. 

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Palmer, C., 2020. How quantitative easing works: Evidence 

Working Paper.

on the refinancing channel. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87 (3), 1498–1528.

Falato, A., Goldstein, I., Hortacsu, A., 2021a. Financial fragility in the Covid-19 crisis: 
The case of investment funds in corporate bond markets. J. Monet. Econ. 123, 
35–52.

Falato, A., Hortacsu, A., Li, D., Shin, C., 2021b. Fire-sale spillovers in debt markets. J. 

Luck,  S.,  Zimmermann,  T.,  2020.  Employment  effects  of  unconventional  monetary 

policy: Evidence from QE. J. Financ. Econ. 135 (3), 678–703.

Midrigan, V., Xu, D., 2014. Finance and misallocation: Evidence from plant-level data. 

Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (2), 422–458.

Morgan Stanley, 2018a. M&Aking a leveraged balance sheet. Corporate Credit Research 

Financ. 76 (6), 3055–3102.

Faust, J., Gilchrist, S., Wright, J.H., Zakrajšek, E., 2013. Credit Spreads as Predictors of 
Real-Time Economic Activity: A Bayesian Model-Averaging Approach. Rev. Econ. 
Stat. 95 (5), 1501–1519.

Foley-Fisher, N., Ramcharan, R., Yu, E., 2016. The impact of unconventional monetary 
policy on firm financing constraints: Evidence from the maturity extension program. 
J. Financ. Econ. 122 (2), 409–429.

Fringuellotti, F., Santos, J., 2022. Insurance companies and the growth of corporate 

loans’ securitization. Working Paper.

Gagnon, J., Raskin, M., Remache, J., Sack, B., 2011. The financial market effects of 
the federal reserve’s large-scale asset purchases. Int. J. Central Bank. 7 (1), 3–43, 
URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/ijc/ijcjou/y2011q1a1.html.

Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2018. Two myths of the 2008 meltdown. Project Syndicate.
Gilchrist, S., Wei, B., Yue, V.Z., Zakrajšek, E., 2020. The Fed Takes on Corporate Credit 
Risk: An Analysis of the Efficacy of the SMCCF. NBER Working Papers 27809.
Gilchrist, S., Zakrajšek, E., 2012. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. Am. 

Goldstein, I., Huang, C., 2020. Credit rating inflation and firms’ investments. J. Financ. 

Greenwood, R., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2018. The impact of pensions and insurance on 

Guerrieri,  V.,  Kondor,  P.,  2012.  Fund  managers,  career  concerns,  and  asset  price 

volatility. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (5), 1986–2017.

Haddad, V., Moreira, A., Muir, T., 2021. When selling becomes viral: Disruptions in 
debt markets in the COVID-19 crisis and the fed’s response. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 
(11), 5309–5351.

Econ. Rev. 102 (4), 1692–1720.

75 (6), 2929–2972.

global yield curves. Working Paper.

North America.

America, 

Morgan Stanley, 2018b. The nature of the BBBeast. Corporate Credit Research North 

NAIC, 2015. Capital Markets Special Report. Special report, National Association of 
Insurance Commissioners, URL https://content.naic.org/sites/default/files/capital-
markets-special-report-update-derivatives-exposure-trends.pdf.

Oehmke, M., Zawadowski, A., 2015. Synthetic or real? The equilibrium effects of credit 

default swaps on bond markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (12), 3303–3337.

Rajan, R., 2013. A step in the dark: Unconventional monetary policy after the crisis. 

Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture.

Rodnyansky, A., Darmouni, O., 2017. The effects of quantitative easing on bank lending 

behavior. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (11), 3858–3887.

S&P Global, 2020a. BBB bond downgrades added USD 88 Billion to the high-yield bond 
market  YTD.  URL  https://www.spglobal.com/en/research-insights/articles/bbb-
bond-downgrades-added-usd-88-billion-to-the-high-yield-bond-market-ytd.  (Online, 
Accessed 1 February 2021).

S&P  Global,  2020b.  Fed  expands  primary  and  secondary  facilities  to  boost  fallen 
angels. URL https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest
-news-headlines/fed-expands-primary-and-secondary-facilities-to-boost-fallen-angels
-57984618. (Online, Accessed 27 September 2021).

Stein,  J.,  2013.  Overheating  in  credit  markets:  Origins,  measurement,  and  policy 
responses. In: ‘‘Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: 
Why Household Balance Sheets Matter’’ Research Symposium.

Vayanos, D., Vila, J.-L., 2021. A preferred-habitat model of the term structure of interest 

rates. Econometrica 89, 77–112.

Whited, T., Zhao, J., 2021. The misallocation of finance. J. Financ. 76 (5), 2359–2407.

22 

