Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Receiving investors in the block market for corporate bonds

Stacey Jacobsen , Kumar Venkataraman *

Cox School of Business, Southern Methodist University, Dallas TX 75025, United States

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link:  Receiving Investors in the Block 
Market for Corporate Bonds (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G12
G14
G18
G23
G24 

Keywords:
Block market
Dealer
Trading cost
Transparency
Asymmetric information
Receiving investors

1. Introduction

We study block trades in the corporate bond market, where dealers buy or sell blocks from initiating customers 
and offset their positions with receiving investors. Our findings indicate that while receivers benefit from trading 
cost savings, they primarily bear adverse selection costs and experience worse outcomes when informed trading 
is prevalent. Mandatory trade reporting improves receiver outcomes by revealing dealers’ private information, 
but the benefits are reduced when reporting is delayed. Our results emphasize the importance of transparency 
regime design and suggest potential market fragility: if information asymmetry becomes severe, receivers may 
withdraw from the block market.

We  examine  the  block  market’s  role  in  facilitating  large  trades  in 
corporate bonds. Transactions over $15 million have comprised nearly 
15 % of corporate bond volume over the past two decades, highlighting 
the block market as an important liquidity source for institutional in-
vestors. Block trading generally involves a sequence of negotiated, non- 
anonymous, and asynchronous transactions: an “initiating” block trade 
between the institution and the dealer, typically facilitated in a principal 
capacity, and the dealer’s related trades with “receiving”  investors to 
offset the block position. Receiving investors play an important role in 
the theoretical models of the block market, yet they have received little 

attention in the empirical literature.

The goal of this article is to study outcomes for receiving investors 
(henceforth,  receivers)  to  whom  dealers  distribute  block  positions. 
Theoretical models, such as those by Burdett and O’Hara (1987), Naik 
et al. (1999) and Back et al. (2020), depict a setting in which a dealer 
acquires  a  block  position  and  then  disposes  of  it  through  a  series  of 
transactions.  Given  that  informed  traders  tend  to  transact  in  larger 
quantities,  information  asymmetry  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the  block 
market. In these models, the dealer typically possesses less information 
than  the  customer  initiating  the  block  trade  (henceforth,  initiator). 
However, the dealer may partially infer the trade’s motive by observing 
signals such as block size, price, and initiator identity during bilateral 

We  thank  Nikolai  Roussanov  (the  editor),  an  anonymous  referee,  Julien  Alexandre,  Kerry  Back,  Hank  Bessembinder,  Corey  Garriott,  Ananth  Madhavan,  Bill 
Maxwell, Richard McVey, Stanislava Nikolova, Andy Puckett, Matt Randsdorp, Brian Roseman, Jonathan Sokobin, Paul Schultz, Paul Tetlock, Sinem Uysal, Liying 
Wang,  David  Xu,  Yesha  Yadav,  Alex  Zhou,  and  seminar  participants  at  Financial  Management  Association  conference,  Kentucky  Smokey  Mountain  conference, 
Vanderbilt Law and Business conference, University of Nebraska, Oklahoma State University, Penn State University and Southern Methodist University for valuable 
comments. We thank FINRA for provision of the data and Alie Diagne, Ola Persson, Jonathan Sokobin and Lori Walsh for supporting the study. Venkataraman thanks 
Larry Harris, Elisse Walter, and members of the SEC’s FIMSAC transparency committee for related discussions. None of the authors received financial support specific 
to  this  project.  Jacobsen  has  no  conflicts  of  interest  to  report.  Venkataraman  was  a  visiting  economist  at  Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority  (FINRA)  and 
acknowledges financial support for other projects. He provides expert witness services to a variety of clients.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: kumar@mail.cox.smu.edu (K. Venkataraman). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104061
Received 13 December 2023; Received in revised form 24 March 2025; Accepted 30 March 2025  
Available online 5 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

negotiations. The least informed is the receiver who is approached by 
the dealer interested in trading out of the block position. In the frame-
work  of  Burdett  and  O’Hara  (1987),  receivers  lack  information 
regarding the yet-to-be-reported block trade, its size and the initiator’s 
identity, making it difficult for them to anticipate the block’s informa-
tion  effects  fully.  In  this  setting  of  heightened  adverse  selection  risk, 
understanding the economics of receiver participation is important for 
validating  the  well-developed  theoretical  models  and  for  designing  a 
well-functioning block market.

We focus on the corporate bond block market for several reasons. 
First, in comparison to equities which trade frequently, corporate bonds 
are substantially less liquid, subjecting dealers to greater inventory risk 
on block positions. The Volcker rule has reduced dealers’ willingness to 
commit  capital  to  market  making  in  corporate  bonds,1 thereby 
increasing the importance of receivers, who supply liquidity to dealers, 
for maintaining a resilient block market.

Second, most publicly available databases, such as Trade and Quote 
(TAQ) data for U.S. equities, do not identify the parties involved in a 
trade.  As  a  result,  even  the  most  fundamental  theoretical  predictions 
about  receivers  remain  untested,  as  the  relationships  hypothesized  in 
theory  may  be  obscured  in  the  available  transactions  data  which 
represent a mixture of trader types. Our study addresses this gap in the 
literature by utilizing the enhanced corporate bond TRACE transaction 
data,  which  captures  the  entire  history  of  the  dealers’  trades  with 
counterparties.  We  leverage  these  unique  data  features  to  develop  a 
methodology for identifying the initiating block trade and the dealer’s 
related trades with receivers.2 This identification process is more precise 
in markets where trading is sparse, as is typical with corporate bonds.
Third,  unlike  equities  that  are  traded  on  highly  transparent  ex-
changes,  corporate  bonds  are  traded  in  a  relatively  opaque  over-the- 
counter  (OTC)  market,  where  quotations  are  available  only  to  select 
market participants, and completed trades are often subject to reporting 
delays.  In  equity  markets,  an  initiator  can  discreetly  execute  a  large 
block of shares by breaking it into small trades on organized, anonymous 
exchanges.  However,  in  the  OTC  corporate  bond  market,  the  non- 
anonymous bilateral negotiations with dealers make it challenging for 
the  initiator  to  hide  a  block  trade.  These  structural  differences  grant 
dealers significant market power over their customers and exacerbate 
the information asymmetry among block participants in the corporate 
bond market compared to the equity market.

In this article, we study a sample of 205,104 corporate bond block 
transactions,  each  exceeding  $15  million,  alongside  690,418  related 
offsetting  trades  of  dealers  with  receivers,  covering  the  period  from 
2002 to 2021. Our results indicate that dealers typically offset a block 
position  with  three  to  four  counterparties.  The  average  size  of  these 
receiver  trades  is  $9  million,  suggesting  that  receivers  are  predomi-
nantly institutional investors. We examine who benefits and who bears 
the  costs  –  whether  it is  the initiator,  the  dealer, or  the  receiver –  in 
scenarios where adverse selection risk is high, such as when initiators 
have private information. Additionally, we study how trade disclosure 
affects block participants by comparing transparent versus opaque re-
gimes, focusing on the introduction of mandatory post-trade reporting 
(“transparency” events), and the impact of rules pertaining to reductions 
in the trade reporting timeframe (“delay” events).

1 Studies on the impact of the Dodd Frank Act on bank-affiliated dealers in 
the corporate bond market include Schultz (2017), Bao et al. (2018), Bessem-
binder  et  al.  (2018),  Dick-Nielsen  and  Rossi  (2019),  and  Trebbi  and  Xiao 
(2019).

2 Outside  of  the  block  market  setting,  it  can  be  challenging  to  classify 
customer trades as initiating investor trades (which increase dealers’ inventory 
risk)  or  receiving  investor  trades  (which  offset  dealers’  inventory  position). 
Identifying  these  initiating  trades  is  crucial  for  accurately  measuring  their 
impact on prices and how these effects are distributed among participants in the 
block market.

Our  results  highlight  the  important  role  of  the  information  envi-
ronment  in  maintaining  a  healthy  block  market.  Receivers  typically 
experience  worse  outcomes  when  information  effects  are  pronounced 
during block trades, whereas dealers can generally anticipate informed 
trading and manage the adverse selection risk. This raises the question: 
why  do  receivers  continue  to  participate  in  the  block  market  despite 
bearing the costs of adverse selection? Grossman (1992) posits that re-
ceivers are natural counterparties to block initiators with trading desires 
that are known to the  dealer. Our  findings support  this view and are 
consistent with Burdett and O’Hara’s (1987) prediction that, despite the 
potential  for  losses  from  informed  blocks,  receivers  benefit  from  effi-
ciently establishing or liquidating positions by participating in offsetting 
trades with the block dealer. These trading cost savings helps explain the 
block market’s appeal to receivers. However, our results also indicate a 
potential  fragility:  if  information  asymmetry  becomes  pronounced,  it 
could discourage receivers from participating in block trades.

Transparency,  or  the  ability  of  market  participants  to  observe  in-
formation about the trading process, is an important determinant of the 
block market’s  information environment. Our  study  aligns with  theo-
retical predictions (e.g., Madhavan, 1995; Back et al., 2020), showing 
that  disclosing  block  trades  can  convey  private  information  to  the 
market,  leading  to  more  favorable  trading  terms  for  receivers  from 
dealers. However, while greater transparency benefits receivers, trans-
parency matters less when trade reporting is delayed. These insights are 
particularly relevant in the context of recent regulatory proposals con-
cerning transparency in bond markets, which are likely to benefit some 
participants at the expense of others, as noted by Harris (1992). Much of 
the regulatory debate on how the timeliness of trade disclosure affects 
the block market has focused on initiators and dealers. Our study em-
phasizes the importance of considering the welfare of all participants, 
especially receivers, who play a vital role in the block market.

We  begin  by  characterizing  the  price  effects  of  block  trades, 
following  the  existing  block  literature  from  equity  markets,  such  as 
Kraus and Stoll (1972). We estimate both the temporary (liquidity ef-
fects) and permanent (information effects) price impact of block trades. 
Fig. 1 illustrates these price effects in a scenario where the dealer sells a 
block of bonds to the initiator (Dealer Block Sell).3 In this context, the 
price  of  the  block  trade  (PB)  is  higher  than the  pre-trade equilibrium 
value  (PPRE),  indicating  the  cost  incurred  by  the  block  initiator  for 
demanding  immediacy  from  the  dealer.  The  post-trade  equilibrium 
value (PPOST) is higher than pre-trade equilibrium value (PPRE), and the 
difference reflects the information effects of the block trade initiated by 
a large buyer.

Adapting  the  equity  market  block  methodology  to  the  corporate 
bond market, we decompose the liquidity effects (PB - PPOST) of the block 
trade into dealer spread and receiver spread. To offset the block sale at 
price PB, the dealer purchases the bonds at price POFF  from receivers, 
thereby earning the dealer spread (PB - POFF). The primary risks for the 
dealer lie in finding receivers willing to sell at a sufficiently low price 
and being able to quickly offset the block position. The receiver spread 
(POFF  -  PPOST)  compensates  receivers  for  offsetting  the  dealer’s  block 
position.  Notably,  when  information  effects  are  substantial,  receivers 
spreads are negative (i.e., PPOST  > POFF  for a Dealer Block Sell), indi-
cating  that  receivers  sold  the  bonds  at  a  lower  price  than  the  new 
equilibrium  value  established  after  the  block  trade.  Negative  spreads 
reflect the opportunity cost to receivers for participating in the block 
market.

For  our  sample  of  corporate  bond  block  trades,  round-trip  dealer 
spreads average 22 basis points (bp). Initiator costs average 18 bp and 

3 For ease of exposition, we describe the block trade process from the dealers’ 
perspective.  In  a  Dealer  Block  Sell,  the  dealer  sells  a  block  of  bonds  to  the 
initiator and purchases bonds from the receivers. Conversely, in a Dealer Block 
Buy, the dealer buys a block of bonds from the initiator and sells bonds to the 
receivers.

2 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Fig. 1. Block Trading Cost Decomposition for Dealer Block Sell.
The figure illustrates the decomposition of block initiator costs in a scenario where a dealer sells a block of bonds to the initiator (Dealer Block Sell) at price PB at time 
tblock. The block trade price is higher than the pre-trade equilibrium value PPRE at time tPRE. The post-trade equilibrium value (PPOST) at tPOST is higher than the pre- 
trade equilibrium value. The dealer offsets the block position by purchasing bonds at a weighted-average price POFF from receiving investors at time toffset. In Figure 
A, block initiator costs of 20 bp are decomposed into a temporary price impact component (15 bp) and a permanent price impact component (5 bp). In Figure B, block 
initiator costs of 20 bp are further decomposed into dealer spread (10 bp) and receiver spread (5 bp), and a permanent price impact component (5 bp). For a Dealer 
Block Buy scenario, where the dealer buys a block of bonds from the initiator and sells them to receivers, the decomposition would be analogous except in reverse. 
Figure C illustrates receiver spreads before and after block report for a block with large information effects. In this example, block initiator costs are 20 bp and 
permanent price impact is 7.5 bp. Prior to block report, the dealer buys from receiving investors at price POFF-BEF earning a spread of 17.5 bp. Following block report, 
the dealer buys from receivers at a higher price of POFF-AFT earning a lower spread of 10 bp. Receivers offsetting prior to block report lose 5 bp and receivers 
offsetting following block report earn a 2.5 bp spread.

3 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

increase with block size, reflecting that larger blocks often signal higher 
levels  of  private  information  and  impose  greater  inventory  risk  on 
dealers. Receiver spreads average (cid:0) 3 bp, with receivers obtaining better 
terms when dealers are exposed to more significant inventory risk, such 
as in larger block trades and high yield bonds. The average (median) 
permanent price impact of these trades is close to zero (1.4 bp). How-
ever, the data reveals substantial information effects for some blocks, 
with the 66th and 75th percentile of permanent price impact at 25 bp 
and 52 bp, respectively.

We  explore  the  effects  of  asymmetric  information  on  receivers  by 
identifying three settings where the block initiator is more likely to be 
informed. First, we exploit evidence from prior research that sustained 
customer  buying  in  the  corporate  bond  market  is  linked  to  price  dis-
covery  while sustained customer selling  often  leads to  price reversals 
(Cai  et  al.,  2019;  Anand  et  al.,  2021).  We  observe  similar  buy-sell 
asymmetry  in  block  trades,  where  the  permanent  price  impact  is 
higher  for  Dealer  Block  Sells  than  Buys.  We  find  that  dealer  spreads 
remain positive and of similar magnitude for Buys and Sells, while re-
ceivers fail to negotiate a higher offsetting price (POFF) for Dealer Block 
Sells,  resulting  in  negative  spreads  ((cid:0) 12  bp).  For  Dealer  Block  Buys, 
which generally lack information effects, receiver spreads are slightly 
positive (1 bp). Thus, receivers appear unable to anticipate the infor-
mation effects of block trades. Second, when sorting blocks into decile 
portfolios  based  on  ex-post  permanent  price  impact,  we  observe  that 
receivers  fare  worse  on  informed  blocks,  while  dealers’  spreads  are 
relatively unaffected. Third, block trades made prior to major informa-
tion events such as credit rating changes and large earnings surprises 
reveal that receivers primarily bear the adverse selection associated with 
informed blocks.

We  also  examine  the  economic  rationale  behind  why  receivers 
participate in the block market, testing the Burdett and O’Hara (1987)
prediction that receivers gain cost savings in trade execution, particu-
larly for large positions. We estimate these savings using two methods. 
First,  we  employ  a  trading  cost  model,  comparing  actual  receiver 
spreads with the model-implied costs they would incur for initiating a 
hypothetical trade of similar size. This comparison shows that receivers 
benefit by avoiding the liquidity premium associated with initiating a 
trade. Second, we compare the offsetting price of receiver trades in the 
block market with a hypothetical price derived from TRACE trades on 
the  same  side  of  the  market  as  receiver  trades.  Both  methods  show 
comparable  savings,  and  notably,  even  with  information  effects,  re-
ceivers generally fare better (+20 bp for Dealer Block Buys), or at least 
no worse (+1 bp for Dealer Block Sells) by participating as offsets in 
block trades rather than trading a similar-sized position independently.
We  acknowledge  the  difficulties  in  estimating  price  effects  and 
interpreting measures for corporate bonds with infrequent trading. To 
address these issues, we examine the robustness of our results across sub- 
samples that account for trade frequency, trade size and the timeliness of 
TRACE  transactions  when  estimating  benchmark prices. We  also esti-
mate the trading cost savings for receivers in block trades versus com-
parable non-block trades using two approaches that consider trade size, 
market conditions, and the relevant market side. To address the chal-
lenges in reliably identifying the initiating block trade, we also conduct 
robustness analyses on sub-samples where the initiating block is likely 
classified with more accuracy.

We further study how regulations affecting the trading environment 
impact the block market. Our analysis begins with transparency events, 
specifically  the  introduction  of  mandatory  trade  reporting  for  public 
corporate bonds in 2003, 2004 and 2005, as well as for non-public 144A 
corporate bonds in June 2014. Consistent with the empirical literature, 
we find that the introduction of trade reporting reduces dealer spreads in 
the block market.4 However, the impact of trade reporting on customers 

4 See, e.g., Bessembinder et al. (2006), Edwards et al. (2007), Goldstein et al. 

(2007), and O’Hara et al. (2018).

4 

is nuanced and varies with customer type. As theories such as Madhavan 
(1995) suggest, increased transparency benefits less-informed receivers 
in their negotiations with dealers, while outcomes for better-informed 
initiators remain largely unaffected.

Additionally, we examine delay events, focusing on FINRA’s phased 
reduction  in  the  maximum  allowable  reporting  delay  for  corporate 
bonds, which decreased from 75 min to 45 min, then to 30 min, and 
finally  to  15  min,  between  2003  and  2006.  The  permissible  delay  in 
reporting trades to the market lies at the heart of many policy debates 
about  bond  market  structure.  Dealers  and  industry  groups  argue  that 
real-time  block  trade  reporting  makes  it  difficult  for  the  dealer  to 
gradually unwind a block position. They assert that allowing a reporting 
delay is crucial, as it gives dealers the opportunity to partially offset the 
block position before it is disclosed to the market. Recently, regulators 
have  considered  various  proposals,  such  as  extending  the  reporting 
delay for block trades from the current 15 min to 48 h,5 or reducing it to 
no more than one minute.6 The Back et al. (2020) model predicts that 
receivers obtain more favorable terms on offsetting trades made after the 
block trade disclosure compared to those made before it.

We provide supporting evidence through a “within block” analysis, 
controlling for trade, bond issue, and market conditions that may impact 
trading costs. Within each delay regime, receivers achieve substantial 
cost reductions (ranging from 5 bp to 11 bp) on offsetting trades that 
occur after the block trade report compared to those before the report. 
Dealer  spreads  exhibit  a  similar  pattern  but  with  opposite  signs.  Our 
results  highlight  the  importance  of  the  disclosure  regime’s  design. 
Specifically, mandatory reporting of block trades benefits receivers but 
the benefits are diminished when disclosure is delayed.

2. Related literature on block trading and market transparency

The block market is characterized by heightened adverse selection 
and inventory risk. Large trades often signal that the initiator is moti-
vated by private information (Easley and O’Hara, 1987). Dealers must 
also consider the ease of locating receivers and the prices at which they 
can  distribute  the  block.  As  per  theory,  block  dealers  can  reduce  the 
initiator’s  trading  costs  by  mitigating  adverse  selection  through 
screening of informed initiators (Seppi, 1990), minimizing search costs 
by  identifying  receivers  with  latent  demand  (Grossman,  1992),  and 
facilitating risk sharing (Keim and Madhavan, 1996). Empirical studies 
from  the  equity  market  suggest  that  block  trades  are  typically  less 
information-driven  (Madhavan  and  Cheng,  1997;  Booth  et  al.,  2001) 
and are associated with smaller temporary price effects, which can be 
attributed to risk sharing mechanisms (Keim and Madhavan, 1996) and 
trading with a broader base of counterparties (Bessembinder and Ven-
kataraman, 2004).

2.1. The literature on large trades in the corporate bond market

Prior  studies  on  corporate  bonds  find  that  institutions  often  trade 
with a handful of relationship dealers and obtain lower trading costs on 
these trades (Di Maggio et al., 2017; O’Hara et al., 2018; Hendershott 
et al., 2020; Nikolova and Wang, 2020; Goldstein et al., 2021; Jurkatis 
et  al.,  2024).  O’Hara  et  al.  (2018) show  that  dealers  exercise  market 

5 FINRA (in 2019) and the CFTC (in 2020) proposed pilot programs to delay 
reporting of block trades in corporate bonds and swaps, respectively from 15 
minutes to 48 hours (see https://www.finra.org/rules-guidance/notices/19-12
(12/5/2024)  for  FINRA  proposal  and  https://www.cftc.gov/LawRegulation/ 
FederalRegister/finalrules/2020-21568.html (12/5/2024) for CFTC proposal).
6 The FINRA proposal (in 2022) covers trade reporting in corporate bonds, 
agency debt securities, asset-backed securities and agency pass-through mort-
gage-backed securities (MBS). The proposal reduces reporting delay to no more 
than  one-minute.  See  https://www.finra.org/rules-guidance/notices/22-17
(12/5/2024).

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

power, offering better trade terms to more active institutions compared 
to  less  active  ones.  Unlike  equities,  where  trading  costs  typically  in-
crease with trade size, larger corporate bond trades incur lower costs 
than smaller trades (see Edwards et al., 2007; Goldstein et al., 2007), 
reducing the incentive to split a block position. As a result, order split-
ting  appears  to  be  less  common  in  corporate  bonds  than  in  equities, 
though Czech and Pint´er (2022) document evidence of order splitting 
across multiple dealers in the UK market.

Other studies highlight the significant trading challenges in the bond 
market, including high search costs, frequent and costly trade failures, 
and  execution  delays  (Hendershott  et  al.,  2022;  Kargar  et  al.,  2022). 
Goldstein  and  Hotchkiss  (2020) find  that  dealers’  holding  periods 
decrease with higher credit risk and bond illiquidity, highlighting the 
role of inventory and search costs. Research on asset-backed securities 
and municipal bonds by Hollifield et al. (2017) and Li and Schurhoff 
(2019),  respectively,  shows  the  importance  of  a  dealer’s  centrality in 
determining trade terms for customers. These findings suggest that re-
ceivers may benefit from trading with their relationship dealers with a 
recently intermediated block position.

Our  study  complements  Li  et  al.  (2023),  who  examine  portfolio 
trading,  where  dealers  bid  on  a  basket  of  bonds  for  simultaneous 
execution. Although the average portfolio trade size is substantial at $61 
million, the typical portfolio includes over 100 bond issues, resulting in 
an individual bond trade size of about $540,000. While Li et al. (2023)
focus  on  block  trades  that  facilitate  large-scale  portfolio  adjustments, 
our study focuses on block trades that facilitate entry or exit in a single 
bond.  Additionally,  our  work  is  related  to  Choi  et  al.  (2024),  who 
consider  customer  types  in  scenarios  where  trades  are  quickly  paired 
with an opposite signed trade by the same dealer, effectively acting as a 
broker. In comparison, we investigate scenarios where dealers partici-
pate  in  a  principal  capacity,  exposing  them  to  inventory  and  adverse 
selection risks. We then examine how receiver outcomes are influenced 
by information asymmetry, trade disclosure rules, and block attributes. 
We add to the related literature (Anand et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2024) 
showing that liquidity-supplying customers obtain better outcomes than 
liquidity-demanding customers.

testing 

theoretical  predictions 

Madhavan  (2000) argues  that  the  block  market  literature  has  pri-
marily  focused  on  the  initiator’s  perspective,  but  the  benefits  may 
largely  accrue  to  receivers.  While  research  on  trading  costs  of  large 
transactions  exist, 
specific 
customer-types has been challenging. We present a method to identify 
related  trades  in  the  block  market  and  analyze  outcomes  for  specific 
participants,  showing  that  receivers  can  reduce  the  explicit  costs  of 
building or liquidating positions in the block market, as predicted by 
Burdett and O’Hara (1987). Our findings demonstrate the block mar-
ket’s appeal to receivers and highlight the importance of the information 
environment for its effective functioning.

for 

2.2. Transparency and the block market for corporate bonds

Opaque markets offer advantages to dealers during negotiations with 
less informed customers (Pagano and Roell, 1996; Green et al., 2007; 
Back et al., 2020). Transparency regulations, such as timely reporting of 
block trades, diminish this advantage by making valuable information 
available to the market. However, increased transparency could expose 
dealers  to  adverse  price  movements  from  front-running  strategies, 
harming their profits, and potentially reduce their incentives to inter-
mediate blocks or offer competitive quotes to initiators.

The  experimental  evidence  from  Bloomfield  and  O’Hara  (2000)
suggests  that  dealers  prefer  not  to  disclose  their  trades  and  that 
non-disclosing  dealers  earn  substantially  higher  profits.  Empirical 

studies generally find that trade reporting improves customer outcomes 
and  reduces  dealer  spreads  in  corporate  bonds  (Bessembinder  et  al., 
2006; Edwards et al., 2007; Goldstein et al., 2007; O’Hara et al., 2018), 
municipal bonds (Schultz, 2012) and agency mortgage-backed securities 
(Schultz and Song, 2019). However, Gemmill (1996) finds no significant 
change in bid-ask spreads across trade reporting regimes for stocks on 
the  London  Stock  Exchange.  Chalmers  et  al.  (2021) report  lower 
customer trading costs with reduced trade reporting delay for municipal 
bonds; however, the study does not examine the block market nor the 
outcomes for specific customer-types within the intermediation process.
We  exploit  variations  in  trade  reporting  regulation  to  empirically 
validate the theoretical prediction (e.g., Naik et al., 1999; Back et al., 
2020) that transparent regimes level the information playing field. Our 
findings  offer  evidence  of  the  mechanism  envisioned  by  theorists  — 
timely trade disclosure allows receivers to observe the occurrence and 
terms of block trades, helping them manage adverse selection risk in the 
block trade process.7 We also identify customer types that benefit more 
from increased transparency, adding nuance to existing research.

3. Data, methodology and descriptive statistics

3.1. Data sources and sample construction

To construct our initial sample of corporate bonds, we use the Mer-
gent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD). We select non-puttable or 
convertible U.S. Corporate Debentures and U.S. Corporate Bank Notes 
(identified as bond type CDEB or USBN) that have complete issuance 
information, including offering date, amount, and maturity. This selec-
tion results in an initial sample of 55,842 bonds.8

For  corporate  bond  transactions,  we  use  the  enhanced  Trade 
Reporting  and  Compliance  Engine  (TRACE)  data  provided  by  FINRA, 
which  includes  detailed  information  such  as  dealer  identification 
numbers, unmasked trade size, and comprehensive trade data, encom-
passing  trades  disseminated  to  the  public  as  well  as  trades  not  so 
disseminated, spanning the period from July 2002 to November 2021. 
We  link  the  FISD  data  to  TRACE  data  using  the  CUSIP  identifier, 
resulting in a sample of 39,801 bonds and 147.9 million trades.

Table 1 outlines the impact of additional data filters we apply. We 
exclude bonds with fewer than five trades over the nearly twenty-year 
period.  Trades  are  excluded  if  their  reported  size  exceeds  the  bond’s 
offering  amount,  if  they  are  reported  after  the  bond’s  outstanding 
amount is reported as zero, or if they have execution dates before July 
2002. We also exclude primary market transactions as well as secondary 
market  transactions  occurring  immediately  after  issuance.9 Addition-
ally, following the literature, we exclude trades by a specific large dealer 
that,  during  2014,  reported  an  immediately  offsetting  transaction  for 
most  of  its  principal  trades  with  an  affiliated  offshore  entity.  After 
implementing  these  filters,  our  final  sample  consists  of  138.5  million 
secondary market transactions in 38,762 distinct CUSIPs.

7 Adverse  selection  risk  may  stem  from  differences  among  dealers  in  their 
ability  to  screen  informed  initiators  from  the  block  market  (Seppi,  1990),  or 
from  dealers  misrepresenting  risk  to  their  less-favored  customers.  Receivers, 
who frequently interact with the same dealers, can (ex-post) monitor adverse 
selection  and  avoid  dealers  who  consistently  handle  informed  order  flow. 
Conversations with industry professionals confirm that this practice is common.
8 Specifically,  we  exclude  the  following  types  of  debt:  retail  notes,  foreign 
government, agency, municipal, pass- through trusts, pay in kind, strips, zeros, 
Eurobonds/Euronotes, asset and mortgage backed, insured, and guaranteed by 
letters of credit, medium term notes/zeros, convertible, and foreign currency.
9 Bessembinder et al. (2022) show that secondary market trading in a new 
issue in  the days  following issuance  is dominated by the activities of  the un-
derwriting syndicate. If the offering day is on or before the 15th of the month we 
exclude  the  remainder  of  the  issue  month,  otherwise  we  exclude  the  issue 
month and the following month.

5 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 1 
Block trade sample description.

Corporate bonds in FISD After FISD cleaning
Corporate bonds in TRACE and FISD
Exclude bonds with fewer than 5 trades over the sample period
Exclude trades with reported trade size > issue size
Exclude primary market transactions
Exclude trades reported after amount outstanding falls to zero
Exclude trades reported by dealer w/ offshore trades
Exclude trades immediately following offering date
Exclude 2002 trades with pre-July execution dates

Panel A: Sample construction

# Cusips

# Trades

55,842
39,801
39,147
39,143
39,106
38,863
38,861
38,767
38,762

147,886,718
147,885,137
147,882,961
146,212,835
145,987,174
143,677,740
138,528,434
138,526,671

Panel B: Sample description

Block >= $15M

Block $15M - $20M

Block $20M - $30M

Block >= $30M

# Block Trades

Investment Grade
High Yield
Large Dealer Counterparty
Small Dealer Counterparty

Average Block Size ($)
Block Trade Size/Total Bond Volume on Block Day

205,104
146,052
59,052
163,940
41,164
22,631,802
51 %

106,157
73,286
32,871
85,086
21,071
16,162,489
48 %

92,990
67,015
25,975
74,292
18,698
22,595,263
50 %

35,341
26,160
9,181
27,983
7,358
44,400,226
53 %

Panel A summarizes the sample construction. Corporate bond trade data are from TRACE (Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine) and bond descriptive data are from 
the Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD). The sample period is July 2002 to November 2021. Our final sample consists of 38,762 cusips and 138,526,671 
trades. Panel B describes the sample of block trades for four definitions of blocks. We only retain block trades with non-missing block cost measures. We exclude block 
trades that are fully offset by the block dealer in a single trade within 15 min, with cost measures that exceed $50, and with prices below $5.00.

3.2. Measuring price effects of block trades in corporate bonds

In the corporate bond market, where quotation data are often un-
available,  researchers  have  adapted  liquidity  measures  from  equity 
markets,  relying  solely  on  transactions  price  data.  One  widely  used 
metric  for  estimating  trading  costs  is  the  dealer  round-trip  cost 
(Goldstein  et  al.,  2007),  which  measures  the  difference  between  the 
average prices at which dealers sell and buy bonds, serving as a sub-
stitute for the bid-ask spread used in equity markets. In this study, we 
also calculate dealer round-trip costs to quantify dealer spreads in block 
trade  intermediation.  Further,  following  the  block  trade  literature 
(Kraus and Stoll, 1972), we estimate the price effects of corporate bond 
block trades.

Fig. 1 illustrates the price dynamics when a dealer sells a block of 
bonds,  denoted  as  size  Q,  at  the  execution  time  tblock  to  an  initiating 
customer (Dealer Block Sell). The negotiated block price (PB) is often set 
away from the bond’s equilibrium value leading up to the trade, typi-
cally higher for a Dealer Block Sell and lower for a Dealer Block Buy. 
This mark-up or mark-down compensates the dealer for absorbing the 
block  into  inventory,  reflects  the  increased  risk  of  adverse  selection 
inherent in large trades, and reflects a service fee for locating counter-
parties with latent trading interests. In the figure, a Dealer Block Sell 
occurs at a price PB that is higher than the pre-trade equilibrium value 
PPRE, and the markup (PB - PPRE) represents the trading cost borne by the 
initiator. In our main analysis, this hypothetical pre-trade equilibrium 
value  is  calculated  using  the  volume-weighted  average  trade  prices 
(VWAP) across all dealers in the week preceding the block trade. We 
consider several alternate definitions in the robustness analysis. In Eq. 
(1), the variable D equals +1 for a Dealer Block Sell and equals (cid:0) 1 for a 
Dealer Block Buy. 

Block initiator cost, I(Q) = D*[Ln(PB) (cid:0) Ln(PPRE)]*100

(1) 

The  permanent  price  impact,  P(Q),  represents  the  change  in  the 
market’s perception of the bond’s equilibrium value following the block 
trade. In the figure, the post-trade equilibrium value PPOST is higher than 
the pre-trade equilibrium value (PPRE), reflecting the information effects 
of a block trade initiated by a buyer. We calculate the post-trade equi-
librium value using the bond’s VWAP across all dealers in the week after 

the block end date (the block end date is defined in Section 3.5). The 
temporary price impact, T(Q), captures the short-term liquidity effects, 
measured  by  the  price  deviation  caused  by  the  block  trade’s  price 
pressure,  and  its  reversal  to  the  new  equilibrium  value  following  the 
trade.10

Temporary price impact, T(Q) = D*[Ln(PB) (cid:0) Ln(PPOST)]*100

Permanent price impact, P(Q) = D*[Ln(PPOST) (cid:0) Ln(PPRE)]*100

(2) 

(3) 

Unlike  the  US  equities  TAQ  database,  which  lacks  market  maker 
identifiers, the enhanced TRACE corporate bond data includes detailed 
buy and sell trade identifier and dealer codes. The ability to sign trades is 
crucial  for  the  block  market  analysis,  as  the  expected  price  effects  of 
Dealer  Block  Buys  and  Sells  are  opposite,  and  combining  these  cate-
gories would obscure the price effects of interest. Dealer codes at the 
trade-level  allow  us  to  comprehensively  track  the  buying  and  selling 
activities of individual dealers. We leverage these data attributes to link 
the block trade to the dealer’s related trades with receivers, detailed in 
Section 3.5.

Having  identified  the  related  receiver  trades,  we  adapt  the  equity 
block  market  methodology  to  the  corporate  bond  market  by  decom-
posing the temporary price impact into dealer and receiver spreads. In a 
Dealer Block Sell, the dealer gains by repurchasing the bonds from re-
ceivers at a lower price (POFF) to cover the block position, thus earning a 
dealer  spread  (PB  -  POFF).  The  dealer’s  primary  risk  involves  finding 
receivers willing to sell at a sufficiently low price and the potential delay 
in offsetting the position. We calculate dealer spreads by comparing the 
block trade price PB with the VWAP of the receiver trades (POFF), which 
represents the price at which the dealer offsets the block position. 

10 The block market measures align closely with those used to assess trading 
costs  in  equity  markets,  such  as  effective  spreads  for  immediacy  costs,  price 
impact  for  information  effects,  and  realized  spreads  for  liquidity  effects.  For 
non-block  trades,  the  pre-  and  post-trade  equilibrium  values  are  calculated 
using the mid-point of the quoted bid and ask prices over short intervals, such 
as few minutes before and after the trade. In contrast, for block trades, equi-
librium values are measured over longer intervals, such as several trading days, 
reflecting the larger scale and extended impact of these trades.

6 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Dealer spread, D(Q) = D*[Ln(PB) (cid:0) Ln(POFF)]*100

(4) 

In scenarios where dealers face significant inventory risk – such as 
with illiquid bonds, block trades, or during market stress – receivers can 
capture a portion of the temporary price effects by providing liquidity to 
the dealer. We measure receiver spreads as the difference between the 
price at which the receivers offset the block position and the equilibrium 
value after the block trade (e.g., POFF - PPOST for a Dealer Block Sell). In 
Fig. 1, a positive value means receivers sold the bond to the dealer at a 
higher price than its value if continuing to hold the bond. Receivers bear 
the risk that this spread could turn negative, particularly if the block has 
significant information effects. In such cases (PPOST  > POFF  for a Block 
Dealer Sell), a negative spread indicates that receivers were worse off 
selling  the  bond  to  the  dealer  compared  to  its  post-trade  equilibrium 
value. 

Receiver spread, R(Q) = D*[Ln(POFF ) (cid:0) Ln(PPOST)]*100

(5) 

Fig.  1,  Panel  A,  illustrates  a  Dealer  Block  Sell  where  the  initiator 
incurs a 20 bp cost, calculated as the difference between the block price 
and  the  pre-trade  equilibrium  value  (PB  -  PPRE).  This  cost  includes  a 
permanent price impact of 5 bp (change in equilibrium value, PPOST  - 
PPRE) and a temporary price impact of 15 bp (price reversal, PB - PPOST). 
Panel B further decomposes the temporary price impact of 15 bp into a 
dealer spread of 10 bp and a receiver spread of 5 bp. The dealer spread 
(PB - POFF) represents the dealer’s realized gain or loss, while the receiver 
spread  (POFF  -  PPOST)  is  a  notional  outcome,  as  the  receiver’s  actual 
holding period may not align with the timeframe used to measure the 
bond’s equilibrium value after the trade.

Fig. 1, Panel C illustrates how the delay events that shorten the trade 
reporting  timeframe  improves  receiver  outcomes,  particularly  when 
information effects are significant (permanent price impact, PPOST - PPRE, 
is 7.5 bp). Before the reporting of the block trade, the receiver sells the 
bonds at price POFF-BEF which is closer to the pre-trade equilibrium value 
(PPRE), leading to receiver spread of (cid:0) 5 bp (PPOST  - POFF-BEF). TRACE 
reporting rules do not disclose the initiator’s identity and actual block 
size to the public, known only to the dealer, limiting receiver’s ability to 
fully assess information effects.11 Once the block trade is reported, the 
market adjusts the bond’s equilibrium value, taking into account new 
information, such as the occurrence of the block trade and its reported 
price (PB). For example, observing a higher initiator cost might signal 
the presence of an informed block buyer or a mega-block, leading the 
market to revise the valuation higher from PPRE to PPOST. Following the 
report of the block trade, the receiver sells at a higher price of POFF-AFT 
earning a positive spread of 2.5 bp (PPOST - POFF-AFT). Timely reporting 
thus  helps  receivers  negotiate  a  better  trade  price  with  the  dealer, 
enhancing their outcomes.

3.3. Measuring savings to receivers

Theoretical model, such as Grossman (1992) and Madhavan (1995)
describe  receivers  as  natural  counterparties  to  block  initiators,  with 
trading interests that are known to the dealer. According to the model of 
Burdett  and  O’Hara  (1987),  although  receivers  may  infer  the  block’s 
presence, they may  not be able to fully assess its information  effects. 
Nevertheless, this  model suggest that reduced trading  costs are  a sig-
nificant benefit to receivers, who would incur larger costs to initiate a 
similar trade. Risk-averse receivers may also prefer to avoid execution 
delays  and  the  higher  costs  associated  with  smaller  trades  in  OTC 

11 FINRA currently imposes dissemination caps to large-size trades in corpo-
rate bonds. For trades at or below these caps, both the price and trade size are 
reported. For trades above these caps, only the price and a capped trade size are 
disclosed  -  "5MM+"  for  Investment  Grade  bonds  and  "1MM+"  for  high-yield 
bonds. The full trade size is published later as part of a historical dataset, six 
months after the end of the calendar quarter in which the trade is reported.

markets;  by  participating  as  a  counterparty,  receivers  acquire  larger 
positions at known prices and avoid the premiums for initiating trades. 
Moreover, receivers may strengthen their relationships with the inter-
mediating dealer, obtaining transaction cost benefits for future trades.

To test these predictions, we estimate cost savings for receivers using 
two methods that account for trade size, market conditions and market 
side (buying or selling). The first method computes the costs receivers 
would incur if they initiated a hypothetical trade of similar size based on 
a  block  trading  cost  model;  these  model-imputed  costs  are  then 
compared to actual receiver spreads.

The second method calculates the hypothetical price for building or 
liquidating a position using all TRACE transaction prices close in time to 
the  block  trade,  specific  to  the  relevant  market  side.  Comparing  this 
hypothetical price with the receiver’s offsetting trade price (POFF) pro-
vides a second estimate of cost savings. These savings could potentially 
reflect  the  benefits  of  trading  with  relationship  dealers  in  the  block 
market compared to executing multiple, smaller transactions with non- 
relationship  counterparts.  These  measures  are  described  in  detail  in 
Section 4.3.

3.4. Block market activity through time

Fig. 2 shows the market share of block trades within the corporate 
bond market from 2002 to 2021. We define a block trade as a dealer’s 
sale or purchase with a customer in a single transaction with par value of 
at least $15 million and report the market share for block size thresholds 
of  $15,  $20  and  $30  million.  During  this  period,  the  corporate  bond 
market  experienced  significant  events,  including  the  phased  imple-
mentation  of  trade  reporting  (2002–2005),  the  global  financial  crisis 
(2007–2009), post-crisis bank regulations (2011–2014), and the rise of 
electronic  trading  platforms.  Despite  these  market  developments,  the 
market  share  of  block  trades  remained  remarkably  stable,  averaging 
about 13 % of the trading volume reported on TRACE (Fig. 2, Panel A). 
Block trades constitute a higher share of trading volume in investment 
grade bonds compared to high yield bonds (Fig. 2, Panel B).

We also examine prearranged blocks trades, commonly referred to as 
“riskless  principal”  trades,  where  the  dealer  immediately  offsets  the 
block position by executing a single opposite-direction trade within 15 
min, effectively acting as a broker or agent (see Harris, 2016; Choi et al., 
2024).  Fig.  2,  Panel  C  shows  that  these  prearranged  block  trades 
consistently represent about 11 % of the total block volume throughout 
the sample period.12

Appendix  Fig.  1  shows  that  the  patterns  in  block  market  trading 
activity  remain  consistent  even  after  accounting  for  changes  in  bond 
attributes and market conditions through regression analysis over the 
sample period. Our findings do not support industry concerns that the 
relevance  of  the  block  market  for  corporate  bonds  has  declined  over 
time.

3.5. Identifying block trades and receiver trades in TRACE data

We define “triggering” or “initiating” block trades as those with a par 
value of at least $15 million, and we consider four block size definitions 
throughout  the  majority  of  our  analyses:  1)  trades  greater  than  $15 
million, 2) trades between $15 million and $20 million, 3) trades be-
tween  $20  million  and  $30  million,  and  4)  trades  greater  than  $30 
million.

For each block trade, we identify the dealers’ offsetting trades with 
receivers as follows. We begin by retaining all trades executed by the 
block dealer in the same bond during the week following the block trade 
date, covering five trading days. As an example, if the block trade occurs 

12 Bessembinder et al. (2018) report that over 90% of the dealer-to-customer 
trades  each  year  from  2006  and  2016  were  executed  as  “principal”  trades, 
where dealers absorbed the trades into inventory rather than prearranged them.

7 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Fig. 2. Block Trading Activity 2002–2021.
The figures show block trading statistics over the July 2002 to November 2021 sample period. Figure A shows block trading volume as a proportion of total volume. A 
block trade is a dealer’s sale or purchase with a customer in a single transaction with a par value of at least $15 million (blue solid), $20 million (long red dash), and 
$30 million (short green dash). Figure B shows block trading volume for blocks of at least $15 million as a share of total volume, distinguished between investment- 
grade bonds (blue solid line) and high-yield bonds (long red dash). Figure C shows the percentage of block trades that are prearranged, defined as those offset in a 
single trade within 15 min.

on a Wednesday, the “block week” extends from that Wednesday to next 
Tuesday. Then, starting with the block volume, we cumulate the dealer’s 
(signed) trading volume in the bond. If the cumulative imbalance rea-
ches  or  crosses  zero  during  the  block  week,  the  block  is  classified  as 
“fully  offset”. The “block end”  time is  defined as  the earlier  of either 
when  the  block is  fully  offset or  the end  of  the block  week. Receiver 
trades  are  identified  as  those  that  offset  the  dealer’s  block  position 
before the block end time. For example, in a Dealer Block Sell scenario, 
receiver  trades  are  those  where  the  dealer  acts  as  a  buyer  in  the 
transaction.

We  focus  on  the  block  week  spanning  five  trading  days  for  two 
reasons.  First,  empirical  evidence  on  dealer  behavior  supports  this 
timeframe.  Bessembinder  et  al.  (2018) show  that  the  proportion  of 
weekly trading volume held in dealers’ weekend inventory is typically 
<10  %.  Goldstein  and  Hotchkiss  (2020) report  a  median  and  mean 
dealer holding period of one day and ten days, respectively. Hollifield 
et al. (2020) show that over 70 % of large trades are matched within a 
week. Second, as the time between the block trade and receiver trades 
increases, the link between the triggering block trade and the dealers’ 
related trades of opposite sign becomes less clear.

We categorize the earliest large trade as the initiating block trade; 
thus, any subsequent block trades in the same bond by the same dealer, 
occurring  before  the  block  end  time  and  with  the  opposite  sign,  are 
classified as receiver trades rather than initiating trades. Receiver trades 
can  include  non-block  trades  executed  on  the  block  day  prior  to  the 

block execution time, as well as any offsetting trades, regardless of size, 
that occur after the block execution time. After the block end time, any 
subsequent trades by the dealer in the bond that meets the block defi-
nition is classified as a new initiating block trade. Appendix A provides 
detailed examples and a thorough explanation of the methodology.

We  acknowledge  the  difficulty  in  identifying  the  initiating  block 
trade. When dealers prearrange block trades, it often becomes ambig-
uous  whether  the  initiating  customer  was  a  buyer  or  a  seller,  as  the 
dealer intermediates both a block buy and sell of similar size within a 
short time frame. To address this, our sample selection criteria require 
that  the  block  trade  meet  the  $15  million  size  threshold  and  are  not 
reported as an “agency” trade on TRACE, nor flagged as a prearranged 
trade  by  our  matching  algorithm.13 Section  4.3 discusses  potential 
classification errors and the robustness of our main findings in detail.

13 Our algorithm flags a block trade as prearranged if the dealer offsets the 
block position with a similar sized trade within 15 minutes. In such cases, both 
the  block  trade  and  the  offsetting  trade  are  excluded  from  our  sample.  Choi 
et  al.  (2024) show  that,  in  a  broader  sample  of  all  TRACE  corporate  bond 
transactions, trades matched with other customers have narrower spreads than 
trades where the dealer holds the bonds in inventory. This finding supports the 
idea that, in blocks in which the dealer acts as an agent (i.e., agency or pre-
arranged trades), there is less incentive for the dealer to negotiate a block price 
away from the equilibrium value.

8 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 2 
Receiver trade sample description.

# Block Trades
# Receiver Trades
# Receiver Trades per Block
% Block Trades w/ Multiple Receiver Trades
% Receiver Trades "Customer" Counterparty

Block Level: Receiver Trade Size (Weighted Average)

% ≥ $15M

Individual Level: Distribution by Trade Size

≤$100K
>$100 K - <$1M
≥$1 M - <$5M
≥$5M - <$10M
≥$10M - <$15M
≥$15M

Block ≥ $15M

Block $15M - $20M

Block $20M - $30M

Block ≥ $30M

Panel A: Receiver trade sample statistics

205,104
690,418
3.37
72 %
71 %

106,157
326,626
3.08
69 %
72 %

Panel B: Receiver trade size statistics

8,913,353
22 %

7,730,210
21 %

17 %
17 %
26 %
17 %
11 %
12 %

Panel C: Amount of offsets

18 %
17 %
27 %
18 %
11 %
10 %

64 %
44 %

92,990
318,584
3.43
73 %
71 %

9,798,451
26 %

17 %
16 %
26 %
17 %
11 %
14 %

64 %
42 %

35,341
142,617
4.04
77 %
74 %

15,572,302
35 %

15 %
15 %
23 %
16 %
10 %
20 %

67 %
42 %

% of Block Position Offset in Days [1,5]
% of Blocks Fully Offset in Days [1,5]

64 %
41 %

This table reports receiver trade sample statistics. Panel A reports the sample size of receiver trades and the number of block trades with more than one offsetting 
receiver trade. Panel B reports receiver trade size statistics. We report both the block-level receiver trade size based on the weighted average computed across all 
receiver trades in the block and the distribution of trade size across all individual receiver trades. Panel C reports statistics on the total amount of the block offset by 
receiving investor trades. Panel C statistics are computed at the block-level then averaged across all blocks.

To ensure consistency across our price effect measures, we focus on 
block  trades  where  we  have  complete  data  for  initiator  cost,  dealer 
spread and receiver spread. This requires the bond to have at least one 
trade in the week before the block trade, one in the week following the 
block trade, and at least one offsetting trade by the block dealer during 
the block week. We also exclude blocks with extreme price effect values: 
initiator  cost,  dealer  or  receiver  spread,  or  permanent  price  impact 
exceeding $50 (likely indicative of errors), as well as blocks with a block 
trade price below $5.14 Trading costs are winsorized at the 1 % and 99 % 
levels.

3.6. Sample summary statistics

Table 1, Panel B provides summary statistics for our main sample of 
205,104 corporate bond block trades between 2002 and 2021. Of these 
trades,  71  %  (146,052)  represent  investment  grade  bonds  and  29  % 
(59,052) represent high yield bonds. The majority (80 %) of block trades 
are intermediated by large dealers. The average block size for the main 
sample is $22.6 million in par value. For the mega-block sub-sample, 
defined by a higher size threshold of $30 million, the average block size 
is  $44.4  million.  The  typical  block  trade  averages  51  %  of  the  total 
trading volume for the bond on the day of the block trade.

Table  2,  Panel  A  provides  summary  statistics  for  our  sample  of 

14 The criteria that spread measures must not exceed $50 removes 0.02% of 
the sample, while excluding trades classified as agency or prearranged trades 
removes  an  additional  12%.  The  requirement  for  complete  data  on  initiator 
costs, dealer spreads, receiver spreads, and permanent price impact leads to the 
exclusion of 20% of the sample. Most of these excluded blocks lack an offsetting 
trade within the block week. Admittedly, dealers’ unwillingness or inability to 
offset a block trade within a week may not be random and could be influenced 
by specific factors. Our analysis indicates that the excluded blocks are typically 
larger, averaging $700,000 more in size. They are also more likely to be Dealer 
Block Sell trades – linked in Section 4.2 to adverse selection risk – and are more 
commonly facilitated by small dealers. Additionally, these excluded blocks are 
less  often  associated  with  high  yield  bonds,  which  aligns  with  Goldstein  and 
Hotchkiss (2020), who show that dealers typically offset inventory from high 
yield bonds more quickly.

receiver trades. We identify 690,418 receiver trades associated with the 
block  trade  sample,  implying  that  each  block  trade  is  associated  on 
average with 3.37 receiver trades. Of the 205,104 block trades, 72 % are 
associated with more than one receiver trade, with this figure rising to 
77 % for the mega block sample. The majority of receiver trades (71 %) 
have customers as counterparties, aligning with Hollifield et al. (2020)
who find that small trades are more likely to be offset with other dealers, 
while large trades are more likely to be offset with customers.

Table 2, Panel B shows that the weighted average receiver trade size 
at  the  block  level  is  $8.9  million,  compared  to  an  average  TRACE- 
reported trade size of 0.5 million during our sample period. At the in-
dividual receiver trade level, 34 % of trades are less than $1 million, 54 
% are between $1 and $15 million and 12 % exceed $15 million. This 
distribution suggests that receivers are primarily institutions, consistent 
with block market theory. Both the average receiver trade size and the 
number of receiver trades increase with block size. For mega-blocks, the 
weighted average receiver trade size is $15.6 million, and the number of 
receiver trades average 4.04.

Table 2, Panel C reports that, on average, dealers offset 64 % of the 
block  position  during  the  block-week,  with  about 41  %  of  the  blocks 
being  fully offset during  this period.  The offsetting  statistics  are rela-
tively consistent, even for larger block trades. Fig. 5 shows that dealers 
offset a substantial portion of the block position on the same day. By the 
end of the block day, dealers’ closing positions average $12.5 million for 
Dealer Block Buys and -$7.9 million for Dealer Block Sells, compared to 
an average block trade size of $22.6 million.

4. The economics of participation by receivers in the block 
market

4.1. Price effects of block trades in the corporate bond market

Table 3 reports mean  and median  block trading  costs  for the four 
block size definitions. Panel A shows block initiator costs average about 
18 bp for blocks of at least $15 million. With around 10,500 block trades 
annually and an average block size of $23 million, total trading costs 
amount to about $435 million per year. Initiators of mega-blocks face 
higher costs (21 bp) compared to $15-$20 million blocks (16 bp), likely 

9 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 3 
Block trading cost decomposition.

Block Initiator Trading Cost

Permanent Price Impact
Temporary Price Impact

Permanent Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Temporary Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Block >= $15M

Block $15M - $20M

Block $20M - $30M

Block >= $30M

Panel A: Block initiator costs

Mean

0.18

0.00 (a)
0.18

0.00 (a)
0.22
-0.03

Median

0.08

0.01
0.06

0.01
0.13
-0.03

0.16

Panel B: Two-way decomposition

0.00 (a)
0.16

Panel C: Three-way decomposition

0.00 (a)
0.22
-0.06

Panel D: By credit rating

Investment Grade

Mean

0.16
0.03
0.13
0.18
-0.05

Median

0.07
0.02
0.05
0.11
-0.02

Mean

0.17

0.01 (a)
0.17

0.01 (a)
0.22
-0.05

Mean

0.22
-0.08 (a)
0.32
0.31
0.01 (a)

0.21

-0.01 (a)
0.23

-0.01 (a)
0.22
0.00 (a)

Median

0.10
0.00
0.11
0.23
-0.04

High Yield

VWAP (-1,+1)

VWAP >=$1M

VWAP >=$1M, Drop Lowest Tercile # Trades

Panel E: Alternative VWAP specifications

Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Receiver Spread

0.19
0.03
-0.05

0.17
-0.01
-0.04

0.16
-0.02
-0.04

This table reports block trading costs (Panels A-C report costs for four block size definitions: 1) greater than $15 million, greater than/equal to $15 and less than $20 
million, greater than/equal to $20 and less than $30 million, and greater than/equal to $30 million). Panel A reports block initiator costs. Panel B decomposes initiator 
costs into a permanent and temporary price impact component. Panel C decomposes initiator costs into three components: 1) permanent price impact, 2) dealer spread, 
and 3) receiver spread. Initiator cost is the log difference between the price of the bond one week prior to the block trade and the block price. Permanent price impact is 
the log difference between the volume-weighted average trade prices (VWAP) of the bond one week following and one week prior to the block trade. Temporary price 
impact is the log difference between the VWAP of the bond one week following the block trade and the block price. Dealer spread is the log difference between the 
weighted average price that the dealer offsets the block trade and the block price. Receiver spread is the log difference between the VWAP of the bond one week 
following the block trade and the weighted average price that the dealer offsets the block. Panel D reports cost estimates for investment grade and high yield bonds for 
the sample of blocks of at least $15 million. Panel E reports cost measures using alternate pre and post-trade VWAP specifications: using trades one day prior/following 
the block trade (Column 1), using trades of at least $1 million (Column 2), and using trades of at least $1 million and excluding blocks where the number of trades in the 
VWAP computation is in the lowest tercile. Variables are winsored at the 1 % and 99 % levels. The (a) indicates the trading cost measure is not statistically different 
from zero at the 5 % level. The unit of analysis is at the individual block-level.

due to increased probability of informed trading and higher inventory 
risk for dealers. Panel D shows that initiator costs are higher for high 
yield bonds (22 bp) than for investment grade bonds (16 bp). These cost 
measures should be interpreted as conditional on the self-selection of 
trade  timing,  as initiators  likely choose to  execute  block trades when 
they anticipate higher liquidity in the block market.15

Table 3, Panel B presents a two-way decomposition of initiator costs 
into permanent and temporary price impact, while Panel C further de-
composes the temporary price impact into dealer and receiver spreads. 
The mean and median permanent price impact are close to zero for the 
entire sample, but the 66th, 75th and 90th percentiles are 25 bp, 52 bp 
and 162 bp, respectively, indicating substantial information effects for 
certain blocks. In contrast to equity markets, where information effects 
increase with block size (e.g., Madhavan and Cheng, 1997), information 
effects for corporate bonds do not exhibit a systematic variation with 
block size. For blocks of at least $15 million, temporary price impact is 
economically large, averaging 18 bp, and increases from 16 bp for small 

15 The  equity  block  market  literature  (e.g.,  Madhavan  and  Cheng,  1997; 
Bessembinder and Venkataraman, 2004) finds that block trades are more likely 
when  liquidity  in  the  electronic  limit  order  book  is  low  (i.e.,  wider  bid-ask 
spreads  and  greater  book  imbalance),  and  that  initiators  accept  higher  block 
trading costs during difficult market conditions.

10 

blocks to 23 bp for mega-blocks. Panel D shows that blocks in high yield 
bonds incur nearly double the temporary price impact compared to in-
vestment grade bonds.

The temporary price impact is entirely absorbed by the dealer, with 
dealer  spreads  averaging  22  bp.  The  magnitude  aligns  with  dealer 
round-trip costs reported in the literature (e.g., Goldstein et al., 2007). 
Dealer  spreads  are  higher  for  high  yield  bonds  (31  bp)  compared  to 
investment  grade  (18  bp)  bonds  and  do  not  vary  with  block  size.  In 
contrast, receivers experience negative spreads, averaging about (cid:0) 3 bp, 
indicating  that  the  offsetting  price  of  receiver  trades  is  often  worse 
(lower for Dealer Block Sells and higher for Dealer Block Buys) than the 
bond’s post-trade equilibrium value. Receivers obtain better terms when 
dealers are exposed to more significant inventory risk: receiver spreads 
average 1 bp for high yield bonds and (cid:0) 5 bp for investment grade bonds 
and receiver spreads improve with larger block sizes, ranging from (cid:0) 6 
bp for smaller blocks to zero for mega blocks.

In Table 3, Panel E reports the relevant cost measures using three 
alternative definitions of pre- and post-trade equilibrium values (PPRE 
and PPOST). In Column (1), the equilibrium value is determined using the 
bond’s VWAP across all dealers on the day prior to the block trade (for 
initiator spreads and permanent price impact) and on the day following 
the block end date (for permanent price impact and receiver spreads). 
Since  receiver  trades  are  often  round-lot  trades,  in  Column  (2),  cost 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

measures are computed using the bond’s VWAP across all dealers using 
only trades with a par value of at least $1 million. Similar to the main 
definition reported in Panel C, we utilize all trades in the week before 
the block trade and week after the block trade end date.

Appendix  Table  1  reports  the  trading  cost  decomposition  and  the 
number  of  trades  used  to  calculate  the  equilibrium  values  based  on 
various additional VWAP definitions. This table shows that the average 
number  of  trades  inputted  into  a  VWAP  computation  are  sufficiently 
large for most sub-samples. In our main specification (Table 3, Panel C), 
there  are,  on  average,  43  trades  available  to  calculate  both  pre-trade 
VWAP (PPre) and post-trade VWAP (PPost). However, for some blocks, 
the number of available trades may be limited, potentially introducing 
noise into the equilibrium values. In Table 3, Panel E, Column (3), the 
equilibrium value is calculated using the bond’s VWAP on trades with a 
par value of least $1 million (similar to Column (2)) while excluding 
blocks in the lowest tercile of trade counts.16 The results show that our 
cost measures are robust across various VWAP definitions: initiator costs 
consistently range between 17 and 19 bp, receiver spreads vary from (cid:0) 4 
to (cid:0) 5 bp, and the permanent price impact remains close to zero.

Appendix Table 2 further explores receiver spreads by counterparty 
type. For blocks where customers constitute the majority of the coun-
terparties,  receivers  lose  4  bp,  whereas  for  blocks  where  dealers 
constitute the majority of the counterparties, receiver spreads are close 
to zero.17 Thus, more informed or connected receivers generally obtain 
better trade terms than less sophisticated receivers.

4.2. Adverse selection risk and receiving investor outcomes

The block market is characterized by heightened asymmetric infor-
mation, with large trades often motivated by private information. The 
theoretical  literature  suggests  that  receivers  are  typically  the  least 
informed participant in this market. Although they may infer the pres-
ence of a block trade when approached by a dealer, they do not observe 
the  initiator’s  identity,  the  signals  exchanged  during  the  negotiations 
between the dealer and initiator, or the true size of the block trade. This 
limits their ability to anticipate the trade’s information effects. Conse-
quently, receiver spreads are expected to decrease and may even turn 
negative when the block trade is informed.

In this section, we test these theoretical predictions concerning how 
asymmetric  information  affects  receivers.  We  begin  by  examining 
receiver  outcomes  based  on  the  observed  permanent  price  impact  of 
block  trades,  a  well-accepted  measure  of  adverse  selection  risk  for 
liquidity providers (see Kraus and Stoll, 1972). As illustrated in Fig. 1, it 
follows mechanically that a higher ex-post permanent price impact leads 
to  a  greater  change  in  the  bond’s  equilibrium  value  (PPOST  -  PPRE). 
However, the impact on the receiver depends on their ability to antici-
pate the block’s information effects and to effectively negotiate the price 
(POFF) at which they are willing to offset the dealer’s position.

We sort our block trade sample into deciles based on permanent price 
impact.  Fig.  3 Panels  A-C  illustrates  average  receiver  spreads,  dealer 
spreads, and initiator costs across these deciles. Panel A shows a clear 
negative  relationship  between  permanent  price  impact  and  receiver 
spreads:  in  Decile  1  (lowest  impact),  receivers  earn  large  positive 
spreads; by Decile 5, spreads are near zero; and in Decile 10, receivers 
earn large negative spreads, indicating they fare worse when the trade is 
informed.  In  contrast,  Panel  B  shows  that  dealers  effectively  manage 

16 For  the  permanent  price  impact  computation,  we  drop  blocks  with  the 
lowest tercile of number of trades in the VWAP in both the pre-trade and post- 
trade period.
17 In an unreported analysis, we regress receiver spread on block character-
istics, bond attributes and market conditions, and include a variable ‘Percent 
Receiver Volume Customer’. Even with the inclusion of controls, receivers who 
are  dealers  obtain  better  trade  terms  of  5.4  bp  than  receivers  who  are 
customers.

11 

adverse selection risk: in Decile 1, dealers earn large positive spreads, 
but spreads remain stable at about 10 bp from Decile 5 through Decile 
10.  Panel  C  shows  a  positive  relationship  between  permanent  price 
impact  and  initiator  cost,  suggesting  that  dealers  anticipate  informed 
blocks and  typically  negotiate  block prices  that  reflect  the  trade’s in-
formation content. Thus, market participants may infer dealers’ expec-
tations about a block’s information content by observing the block trade 
price. These results highlight how timely disclosure of the block trade 
can improve price discovery, which we consider in detail in Section 5.

We  next  leverage  the  evidence  of  asymmetric  information  effects 
associated with sustained customer buying versus selling activity in the 
corporate  bond  market  (Cai  et  al.,  2019;  Anand  et  al.,  2021).  These 
studies find that sustained buying is typically associated with informa-
tion effects, while sustained selling does not exhibit the same trend. This 
evidence aligns with research in the equity block market, where blocks 
initiated by a buyer exhibit a more significant and positive permanent 
price impact than blocks initiated by a seller (Barclay and Warner, 1993; 
Keim and Madhavan, 1996).

The literature often attributes asymmetric information effects to the 
differing motivations behind large trades (Chan and Lakonishok, 1995). 
Blocks initiated by a buyer are usually interpreted as signals of insider 
information or investor optimism about future positive news, leading to 
a stronger market reaction. On the other hand, blocks initiated by sellers 
are  often  perceived  to  be  driven  by  liquidity  needs  or  portfolio  reba-
lancing rather than by adverse insider information, resulting in a less 
pronounced  market  reaction.  Additionally,  prior  research  ascribes 
asymmetric  temporary  price  effects  to  the  inventory  considerations  of 
block  dealers.  According  to  Kraus  and  Stoll  (1972),  dealers  are  more 
likely to use their own capital to facilitate a Dealer Block Buy, while they 
may rely on existing inventory to facilitate a Dealer Block Sell due to 
constraints  on  short  selling.  This  reliance  on  inventory  can  lead  to 
smaller  temporary  price  effects  for  Dealer  Block  Sells  compared  to 
Dealer Block Buys.

Table 4, Panel A reports cost measures for block trades based on their 
direction, similar to those reported in Table 3. Our full sample comprises 
130,109 Dealer Block Buys and 74,995 Dealer Block Sells. The patterns 
exhibit asymmetric information effects, with a higher permanent price 
impact for Dealer Block Sells (7 bp) compared to Dealer Block Buys ((cid:0) 4 
bp), and asymmetric temporary price effects, with Dealer Block Sells (9 
bp) experiencing a smaller impact than Dealer Block Buys (24 bp).

Initiator costs, which reflect both asymmetric information and tem-
porary effects, are generally lower for Dealer Block Sells (15 bp) than 
Dealer  Block  Buys  (19  bp),  despite  the  former  being  associated  with 
greater  adverse  selection  risk.  Dealer  spreads  remain  positive  and  of 
similar  magnitude  across  Dealer  Block  Sells  and  Buys.  However,  re-
ceivers  appear  unable  to  anticipate  the  higher  information  effects  of 
Dealer  Block  Sells  and  fail  to  effectively  negotiate  a  higher  offsetting 
price  (POFF)  when  selling  bonds  to  the  dealer,  resulting  in  negative 
spreads  ((cid:0) 12  bp).  In  contrast,  for  Dealer  Block  Buys,  which  do  not 
exhibit significant information effects, receiver spreads are marginally 
positive (1 bp).

Table  4,  Panel  B  reports  cost  measures  using  alternative  pre-  and 
post-trade equilibrium values (PPRE  and PPOST). The results align with 
those in Panel A, showing slightly lower initiator costs, higher perma-
nent  price  impact,  and  lower  receiver  spreads  for  Dealer  Block  Sells 
compared to Dealer Block Buys, largely due to information effects.

We  next  examine  block  trading  costs  around  major  information 
events  to  identify  blocks  more  likely  to  be  associated  with  informed 
initiators.  We  focus  on  two  negative  information  events  -  negative 
earnings surprises and credit rating downgrades- and two positive in-
formation  events  -  positive  earnings  surprises  and  credit  rating 
upgrades.

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Fig. 3. Block Trading Costs, by Ex-Post Permanent Price Impact.
The figure shows average block trading cost measures across deciles based on ex-post permanent price impact, where decile 1 represents the blocks with the lowest 
price impact and decile 10 represents blocks with the highest price impact. These measures are derived from the full sample of 205,104 block trades of at least $15 
million. Figure A reports receiver spreads, Figure B reports dealer spreads, and Figure C reports initiator costs. Figure D reports receiver savings using two methods: 
the imputed cost from the block trading cost model (in blue), and the hypothetical cost to initiate derived from TRACE trades executed on the same side of the market 
after the block trade (in orange). Savings computations are described in detail in Section 4.4.

To identify earnings surprises, following the approach of Hotchkiss 
and Ronen (2002) and Wei and Zhou (2016), we use IBES summary files 
to  obtain  each  firm-quarter’s  earnings  announcement  date,  reported 
earnings, and the most recent consensus (median analyst) forecast prior 
to the announcement. An earnings surprise is defined as the difference 
between  reported  earnings  and  the  consensus  forecast,  scaled  by  the 
absolute value of the forecast (set to $0.01 if the forecast is zero). We 
focus only on large surprises, defined as at least +5 % (positive) or (cid:0) 5 % 
(negative).18 For credit rating changes, we construct downgrades and 
upgrades  using  rating  change dates  from  Mergent’s Fixed  Income  Se-
curities Database (FISD) .19

For  both  earnings  surprises  and  credit  rating  changes,  we  retain 
blocks traded within the five trading days leading up to the event (days 
(cid:0) 5  to  (cid:0) 1).  Of  the  205,104  blocks,  869  are  associated  with  negative 
earnings surprises, 1182 with positive surprises, 697 with downgrades, 

18 To address extreme outliers or potential data errors, we eliminate earnings 
surprises  with  magnitudes  exceeding  10  (e.g.,  1,000%).  We  match  corporate 
bond data to IBES data using the bond-Compustat/CRSP link, as provided by 
Chuck Fang on the Open Source Bond Asset Pricing (https://openbondassetpric 
ing.com/bond-compustat-crsp-link/) (12/5/2024).
19 Specifically,  for  each  bond,  we  construct  a  time  series  of  credit  ratings. 
Ratings are based on S&P data. If S&P ratings are unavailable, we use Moody’s, 
and if neither is available, we rely on Fitch ratings. We convert these ratings 
into 22 numerical categories, and retain only the dates where a changes in the 
numerical values occurs.

12 

and 178 with upgrades. For negative information events (e.g., negative 
earnings  surprises  and  downgrades),  we  analyze  Dealer  Block  Buys, 
where  the  potentially  informed  initiator  sells  prior  to  the  event.  For 
positive  information  events  (e.g.,  positive  earnings  surprises  and  up-
grades), we examine Dealer Block Sells, where the potentially informed 
initiator buys in advance of the positive news. For context, we compare 
these spreads to the full sample of Dealer Block Buys and Sells, as re-
ported in Table 4.

The  results  are  presented  in  Fig.  4.  Panels  A  and  B  show  receiver 
spreads, and Panels C and D report dealer spreads. In Panel A, for the full 
sample of Dealer Block Buys, receiver spreads are marginally positive 
(+1  bp)  but  the  spreads  turn  negative  for  blocks  linked  to  negative 
earnings  surprises  ((cid:0) 11  bp)  and  downgrades  ((cid:0) 25  bp).  In  contrast, 
Panel C reveals that dealers earn higher spreads when intermediating 
blocks ahead of negative news (29–49 bp for negative earnings surprises 
and downgrades compared to 23 bp for the full sample of Dealer Block 
Buys).

Panel B shows that receiver spreads are negative ((cid:0) 12 bp) for the full 
sample of Dealer Block Sells, and these losses are substantially higher for 
blocks linked  to  positive news  ((cid:0) 23  bp  around positive  earnings  sur-
prises and (cid:0) 73 bp around upgrades). Correspondingly, Panel D shows 
that dealers earn smaller spreads when handling blocks before positive 
news (9–17 bp for positive earnings surprises and upgrades, compared to 
21 bp for the full sample of Dealer Block Sells). These patterns highlight 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 4 
Block trading cost decomposition - buys vs. sells.

Block >= $15M

Block $15M - $20M

Block $20M - $30M

Block >= $30M

Panel A: Full sample

Mean

Median

130,109
0.19
-0.04
0.24
0.23
0.01

74,995
0.15
0.07
0.09
0.21
-0.12

130,109
0.08
0.01
0.08
0.13
-0.01

74,995
0.07
0.03
0.03
0.13
-0.06

Dealer block buys

63,940
0.17
-0.06
0.23
0.23
0.00 (a)

Dealer block sells

42,217
0.14
0.09
0.06
0.21
-0.15

Mean

56,061
0.19
-0.03
0.22
0.22
0.00 (a)

36,929
0.15
0.07
0.08
0.21
-0.13

23,379
0.27
-0.03 (a)
0.29
0.23
0.05

11,962
0.10
0.01 (a)
0.10
0.21
-0.10

Panel B: Alternative VWAP specifications

VWAP (-1,+1)

VWAP >=$1M

VWAP >=$1M, drop lowest tercile # trades

93,739
0.21
-0.01 (a)
0.01

55,955
0.15
0.09
-0.14

Dealer block buys

Dealer block sells

105,052
0.18
-0.05
0.01 (a)

63,999
0.16
0.08
-0.11

80,915
0.17
-0.08
0.01 (a)

52,363
0.16
0.06
-0.10

# Observations
Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Temporary Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

# Observations
Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Temporary Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

# Observations
Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Receiver Spread

# Observations
Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Receiver Spread

This table reports summary statistics of block trading costs for Dealer Block Buys and Dealer Block Sells. In Dealer Block Buys the dealer buys a block of bonds from the 
initiator and in Dealer Block sells a block of bonds to the initiator. Panel A reports costs by trade size sub-samples: trades that exceed $15 million, trades greater than or 
equal to $15 and less than $20 million, trades greater than or equal to $20 and less than $30 million, and trades greater than or equal to $30 million. We decompose 
block initiator costs into two components: permanent price impact and temporary price impact; we then further decompose temporary price impact into two com-
ponents: dealer spread and receiver spread. The unit of analysis is at the individual block-level. Panel B reports mean cost measures using alternate pre- and post-trade 
VWAP specifications: using trades one day prior and following the block trade (Column 1), using trades of at least $1 million (Column 2), and using trades of at least $1 
million and excluding blocks where the number of trades in the VWAP computation is in the lowest tercile. The (a) indicates the trading cost measure is not statistically 
different from zero at the 5 % level. Variables are winsored at the 1 % and 99 % levels.

both  receivers’  and  dealers’  inability  to  fully  anticipate  the  higher 
likelihood of informed trading in the block marker when initiators are 
buying bonds ahead of positive news.

4.3. Trade classification issues and sub-sample analyses

Our  methodology  relies  on  an  accurate  classification  of  customer 
type – the initiating block trade and the related offsetting trades by the 
block dealer. We assess the prevalence and impact of misclassification in 
this section.

Misclassification  may  arise  from  our  assumption  that  the  earliest 
block trade is the initiating trade. To investigate this, we analyze the 
block dealer’s inventory in the same bond in the days leading up to the 
block  trade.  Our  findings  indicate  that  dealers  typically  do  not  accu-
mulate  positions  in  anticipation  of  the  block  trade.  Fig.  5 shows  the 
distribution of the signed end-of-day cumulative imbalance for the block 
dealer in the bond over the [(cid:0) 10, +10] day period around the block 
trade date (time 0). On average, the dealer position remains near zero 
before the block trade, with modest inventory accumulation relative to 
the average block trade size of $22 million.

The  classification  of  block  versus  receiver  trades  is  more  reliable 
when the block trade size is large relative to receiver trade sizes. Table 3 
and 4 report the study’s main findings across four independently con-
structed  samples  based  on  different  block  size  thresholds:  over  $15 
million,  $15–20  million,  $20-$30  million,  and  over  $30  million.  For 
each sample, we first identify the initiating block trades that meet the 
respective size threshold and then apply our methodology to identify the 
related receiver trades.20 As seen in Table 2, Panel B, receiver trades are 
typically smaller than the initiating block trade across all samples. This 
size  disparity  is  especially  pronounced  for  the  mega-block  category 
(over  $30  million),  where  the  average  block  size  is  $44.4  million 
compared to an average receiver trade size of $15.6 million, reducing 
the likelihood of misclassification of the initiating trade. Therefore, the 
robustness  of  our  main  findings  for  the  mega-block  sample  is 
noteworthy.

Table 5, Panel A, presents the main results for additional sub-samples 

20 As a result of this independent resampling, the sum of block trades in the 
three categories does not equal the total number reported for the full sample 
(205,104).  An  alternate  research  design  would  be  to  define  a  block  size 
threshold based on various bond attributes, such as credit rating, issue size, age, 
and  trading  activity.  However,  this  approach  would  introduce  additional 
complexities and reduce transparency. Relatedly, we do not consider block size 
thresholds below $15 million as they impose a less material dollar cost on the 
dealer and would likely increase the prevalence of trade misclassification.

13 

​
​
​
​
S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Fig. 4. Receiver and Dealer Spreads Surrounding Information Events.
The  figure presents average receiver  and dealers  spreads surrounding  information events. We identify  two  types of  negative  events: negative earnings surprises 
(actual earnings 5 % below the median analyst forecast) and credit rating downgrades, as well as two positive events: positive earnings surprises (actual earnings 5 % 
above the median analyst forecast) and credit rating upgrades. For each event, we retain blocks in the five trading days prior to the announcement (days (cid:0) 5 to (cid:0) 1). 
Panels A and B display receiver spreads, while Panels C and D show dealer spreads. For negative news (Panels A and C), the spreads correspond to Dealer Block Buys, 
and for positive news (Panels B and D), they correspond to Dealer Block Sells. The sample includes 869 negative earnings surprises, 697 downgrades, 1182 positive 
earnings surprises, and 178 upgrades. For context, we compare these spreads to the full sample of Dealer Block Buys and Sells, as reported in Table IV.

with  higher  confidence  in  trade  classification;  the  results  reported  in 
Tables 3 and 4 are reported in Column (1) for convenience. We exclude 
blocks if any receiver trade is the same size or larger than the block trade 
(Column (2), 21 % of sample), or where the receiver trade is at least $15 
million (Column (3), 35 % of sample). The findings in Tables 3 and 4
remain robust across these sub-samples.

Misclassification of the initiating block trade may also be more likely 
when the execution time of the initiating block and receiver trades are 
close in time. Under the FINRA reporting rules effective during most of 
our sample period, trades must be reported to TRACE within 15 min of 
execution.  As  a  result,  the  likelihood  of  misclassification  is  reduced 
when the execution time difference between block and receiver trades 
exceeds this reporting delay. About 54 % of receiver trades occur in the 
days following the block trade, 18 % are executed on the same day but 
>15 min after the block trade, and 28 % are executed within 15 min or 
earlier  of  the  block  trade.  Misclassification  concerns  are  particularly 
pronounced when the receiver trade is larger than the block trade and 
offset within 15 min of the block trade. Column (4) shows the results 
excluding such blocks (2 % of the sample); the magnitude of the trading 
cost measures reported in the original sample are maintained.

Finally,  misclassification  may  arise  from  the  assumption  that 

receiver  trades  that  occur  on  the  same  day  as  the  block  trade  but 
executed prior to block execution time are related to the block trade. In 
Column (5), receiver trades executed two hours or more before the block 
trade are excluded (2 % of the sample); the findings in Tables 3 and 4
remain robust.

Table 5, Panel B, presents results for sub-samples based on the speed 
of the dealer’s offset activity. Column (1) shows that for prearranged 
blocks—those fully offset with a single trade within 15 min—initiator 
costs  and  dealer  spreads  are  lower  than  reported  in  Tables  3  and  4, 
reflecting reduced risk when dealers act as agents. Prearranged blocks 
are excluded from our main analyses due to challenges in identifying the 
initiating  block  trade.  Column  (2)  examines  blocks  fully  offset  with 
multiple trades within 15 min (6 % of the sample), where results show 
higher initiator costs and dealer spreads, particularly for Dealer Block 
Buys, suggesting quicker offsets of potentially riskier trades. Column (3) 
analyzes  blocks  fully  offset  on  the  block  day  (25  %  of  the  sample, 
including 6 % within 15 min), showing results similar to the full sample, 
despite reduced exposure to overnight inventory risk. Column (4) ex-
amines blocks fully offset within 5 days (41 % of the sample, including 
25 % on the block day), with price effects consistent with earlier find-
ings. Column (5) examines blocks not fully offset within 5 days (59 % of 

14 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Fig. 5. Dealer Inventory Surrounding the Block Trades.
This figure reports the distribution of the signed end-of-day cumulated inventory (reported in millions) of the block dealer in the block bond over the window ten 
days prior to the block trade date (time 0) and ten days subsequent to the date (day 10). The distribution is based on the full sample of 205,104 block trades of at least 
$15 million. Blue lines represent Dealer Block Buys and orange lines represent Dealer Block Sells. Reported are the mean (solid line), median (dashed line) and 25th 
and 75th percentiles (round dot lines) of the distribution.

the sample), which shows a large permanent price impact, possibly due 
to subsequent information events.

Appendix Table 3 further examines block trading costs across various 
sub-periods (pre-crisis, crisis, post-crisis, Volcker, Covid, post-Covid) ,21
showing  that  initiator  costs  and  dealer  spreads  increased  during  the 
crisis and Covid periods. Although receiver spreads remained stable for 
most of the sample period, they rose during the Covid period. As noted in 
the  literature  (e.g.  O’Hara  and  Zhou,  2021),  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
market  intervention  at  the  onset  of  Covid  facilitated  a  quick  market 
recovery. Consequently, Covid did not cause large information effects, 
but resulted in significant inventory shocks, which our results suggest 
ultimately benefited receivers. Appendix Table 4 shows the trading cost 
decomposition for blocks by terciles of trade counts in the three months 
prior to the block trade. As expected, dealer spreads are lowest for the 
most liquid tercile due to reduced inventory concerns.

The first method relies on a trading cost model reported in Appendix 
Table 5.22 For each block trade, we calculate an “imputed initiator cost” 
based on the model’s fitted value, using the weighted average size of 
receiver trades linked to the block trade.23 We then compare the actual 
receiver spread with this imputed trading cost of a hypothetical trade of 
comparable size. The (pairwise) difference between these two measures 
reflect the cost savings for receivers, as shown in Table 6, Panel A.

For Dealer Block Buys, the receiver spreads average 1 bp (see Table 4, 
Panel A), the imputed costs average 19 bp, and the cost savings average 20 
bp. This indicates that receivers are better off participating in offsetting 
trades  with the  dealer  than initiating a  block buy  of  similar size. For 
Dealer Block Sells, the cost savings are slightly positive at 1 bp, reflecting 
an average receiver spread of (cid:0) 12 bp and imputed costs of 13 bp. This 
suggests that the higher adverse selection costs for receivers when they 

4.4. The economics underlying receiving investor participation

Receivers  often  bear  adverse  selection  costs  and  earn  negative 
spreads,  indicating  they  are  not  adequately  compensated  for  the 
liquidity services they provide to dealers. This raises the question of why 
receivers  continue  to  participate  in  the  block  market.  Burdett  and 
O’Hara  (1987) suggest  that  a  key  incentive  is  the  ability  to  reduce 
trading costs, particularly when receivers need to establish or liquidate a 
large position. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the potential costs 
savings  for  receivers  using  the  two  methods  outlined  in  Section  3.3. 
These  methods  evaluate  whether  receivers  would  have  faced  worse 
outcomes had they initiated a trade themselves, rather than serving as a 
counterparty to the block trade.

21 Following  Bessembinder  et  al.  (2018) and  O’Hara  and  Zhou  (2021) we 
define the pre-crisis period as July 2002 to June 2007, the crisis period as July 
2007  to  April  2009,  the  post-crisis  period  as  May  2009  to  March  2014,  the 
Volcker period as April 2014 to February 2020, the Covid period as March 2020 
to May 2020, and the Post-Covid period as June 2020 to November 2021.

22 We model the determinants of the price effects of block trades using a panel 
regression. The dependent variable in the regressions are initiator costs and the 
associated  component  price  effects  from  Table  4 separately  for  Dealer  Block 
Buys and Sells. The independent variables include the logarithm of block size, 
bond age and issue size, and indicators for high yield, financial sector, on-the- 
run, and 144A bonds, as well as blocks intermediated by small dealers. We also 
consider  the  weekly  corporate  bond  market  index return,  the  trailing weekly 
S&P  index  return,  the  average  three-month  LIBOR  interest  rate,  and  the  VIX 
index  level  over  the  preceding  five  days.  Consistent  with  the  literature  on 
corporate  bond  transactions  costs,  initiator  costs  and  liquidity  effects  of  the 
block are positively associated with block size, bond age, and credit risk, and 
negatively associated with issue size. Regression coefficients on bond attributes 
have a similar sign in the dealer spreads and receiver spreads regressions.
23 To be precise, we estimate the regression model using the sample of Dealer 
Block  Buys  in  Appendix  Table  5 Column  (1),  then  use  model  estimates  to 
forecast imputed initiator costs for the receiver trades associated with Dealer 
Block Sells. Similarly, the imputed costs for the receiver trades associated with 
Dealer Block Buys is based on the regression model using the sample of Dealer 
Block Sells in Appendix Table 5 Column (5). The corporate bond index return is 
measured around the time of the offsetting trades rather than the time of the 
initiating block trade. The trade size  is the weighted average size of receiver 
trades associated with each block trade.

15 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 5 
Block trading cost decomposition - sub-sample analyses.

Panel A: High confidence samples

(1)

Main 
sample

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Exclude block if any 
receiver trade is >=
initiator trade

Exclude block if any receiver 
trade is a block of at least 
$15M

Exclude block if any receiver trade is >
initiator trade and offset within 15 
minutes

Exclude any receiver trade that 
occurs > 2 hours prior to block 
time

N
% of Main Sample Excluded
Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

204,104
nm
0.18
0.00 (a)
0.22
-0.03

Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

N
Cumulative % of Sample
Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

Block Initiator Cost
Permanent Price Impact
Dealer Spread
Receiver Spread

0.19
-0.04
0.23
0.01

0.15
0.07
0.21
-0.12

(1)

Pre- 
arranged

27,706
nm
0.14
0.02 (a)
0.16
0.00

0.17
0.00 (a)
0.18
0.00 (a)

0.08
0.04
0.13
-0.09

161,562
21%
0.20
0.01 (a)
0.23
-0.03

0.21
-0.04
0.24
0.01

0.19
0.09
0.22
-0.11

(2)

All trades

Dealer block buys

Dealer block sells

132,754
35%
0.20
0.02
0.23
-0.05

0.20
-0.03
0.24
-0.01 (a)

0.20
0.10
0.22
-0.12

Panel B: By time to offset block

(3)

199,566
2%
0.18
0.00 (a)
0.22
-0.03

0.19
-0.04
0.23
0.01

0.16
0.07
0.21
-0.12

(4)

199,726
2%
0.18
0.00 (a)
0.22
-0.03

0.19
-0.04
0.22
0.02

0.15
0.07
0.21
-0.11

(5)

Full offset in 15 minutes

Full offset on block day

Full offset by day 5

Not fully offset by day 5

13,331
6%
0.25
0.00 (a)
0.24
0.03

0.29
-0.06
0.26
0.11

0.19
0.10
0.21
-0.09

All trades

Dealer block buys

Dealer block sells

50,564
25%
0.18
-0.02
0.22
-0.01 (a)

0.22
-0.06
0.23
0.06

0.13
0.03 (a)
0.22
-0.11

84,137
41%
0.19
-0.04
0.22
0.01

0.21
-0.07
0.22
0.07

0.15
0.02
0.22
-0.09

120,967
59%
0.17
0.03
0.22
-0.07

0.18
-0.02
0.23
-0.02

0.16
0.10
0.20
-0.14

This table reports summary statistics of trading costs for the full sample of blocks and for Dealer Block Buys and Dealer Block Sells for blocks of at least $15 million. 
Panel A reports the main results reported in Table III and Table IV (also replicated in Column 1 of this table) for sub-samples with high confidence in the classification of 
customer type. We exclude blocks if any receiver trade is the same size or larger than the block trade (Column 2, 21 % of sample), or at least $15 million (Column 3, 35 
% of sample). In Column 4, we exclude blocks if any receiver trade is the same size or larger than the initiator trade and the intermediating dealer offsets the block 
within 15 min (2 % of the sample is excluded). In Column 5, we exclude any receiver trade that occurs two hours or more prior to the block execution time then 
recompute the cost measures. In Panel B, we report results within sub-samples categorized by the speed of the dealer’s offset activity. We report price effects in Column 
1 for prearranged trades (blocks fully offset in a single trade within 15 min), in Column 2 for blocks that are fully offset with multiple trades within 15 min, in Column 3 
for blocks fully offset on the block day, in Column 4 for blocks fully offset within 5 days, and in Column 5 for blocks not fully offset within 5 days. The (a) indicates the 
trading cost measure is not statistically different from zero at the 5 % level. Variables are winsored at the 1 % and 99 % levels.

16 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 6 
Receiver savings from participating in offsetting trades with block trades.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Receiver savings–imputed cost to initiate using block trading cost model

Block >= $15M

Block $15M - $20M

Block $20M - $30M

Block >= $30M

Obs.

Mean

Median

Mean

Receiver Spread
Imputed Initiator Cost * (-1)

Receiver Savings

Receiver Spread
Imputed Initiator Cost * (-1)

Receiver Savings

130,056
130,056
130,056

74,965
74,965
74,965

0.01
-0.19
0.20

-0.12
-0.13
0.01

-0.01
-0.18
0.16

-0.06
-0.13
0.03

Dealer block buys

0.00
-0.19
0.19

Dealer block sells

-0.15
-0.13
-0.03

Panel B: Receiver savings relative to trading post-block at VWAP (t+7)

Dealer block buys

Savings: Relative to Buying at VWAP

126,507

0.17

0.05

0.16

Savings: Relative to Selling at VWAP

73,141

0.05

0.02

0.02

Dealer block sells

Panel C: Receiver savings–alternate VWAP specifications

(1)
VWAP (t+1)

(2)
VWAP >=$1M

(3)
VWAP >=$1M, Drop Lowest Tercile # Trades

N
Savings: Relative to Buying at VWAP

94,696
0.22

105,581
0.10

N
Savings: Relative to Selling at VWAP

54,399
0.11

61,110
0.00 (a)

Dealer block buys

62,249
0.11

Dealer block sells

36,079
0.01 (a)

0.00
-0.18
0.19

-0.13
-0.15
0.01

0.15

0.03

0.05
-0.17
0.22

-0.10
-0.17
0.07

0.19

0.06

(4)
VWAP (t-7)

126,025
0.12

73,400
0.11

This table reports summary statistics of receiver savings for Dealer Block Buys and Sells and for four block size definitions. Receiver savings reflect the difference 
between receiver spreads and the hypothetical cost if the investor had instead initiated a trade rather than serving as a counterparty to a block trade. In Panel A, we 
compute imputed initiator costs using a trading cost model based on the sample of block trades. We use the regression coefficients reported in Appendix Table V 
Columns 1 and 5 and replace block size with the weighted average size of the offsetting trades with the receiver and the corporate bond index return is measured 
around the time of the offsetting trades rather than the time of the triggering block trade. We then use the predicted values from this regression to compute imputed 
initiator cost. Receiver savings is the difference between the imputed initiator cost and the realized receiver spread. In Panels B and C, we calculate a hypothetical cost 
to initiate a trade using the full sample of TRACE transactions data. This hypothetical price is derived from the volume-weighted average trade prices (VWAP) of trades 
with customers across all dealers during the week after the block trade, based on trades executed on the same side of the market as the receiver trades. We report 
savings for the sample of blocks of at least $15 million. Savings for Dealer Block Buys is the difference between the VWAP and the receiver offset price (POFF). Savings 
for Dealer Block Sells is the difference between the receiver offset price (POFF) and the VWAP. In Panel B, we compare offsetting prices to a VWAP computed from trades 
in the week after the block trade. In Panel C, we compute VWAP in the period following the block trade using three alternate specifications: using trades one day 
following the block trade (Column 1), using trades of at least $1 million (Column 2), and using trades of at least $1 million and excluding blocks where the number of 
trades in the VWAP computation is in the lowest tercile (Column 3). In Column 4, we compute VWAP using trades in the week before the block trade. The unit of 
analysis is at the individual block-level. The (a) indicates receiver savings is not statistically different from zero at the 5% level.

17 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 7 
Mandated trade reporting and block trading costs.

Initiator Cost

Dealer Spread

Receiver Spread

Pre-Transparency
Post-Transparency
Chg.

Dependent Variable Average

Post-Transparency

Issue-level fixed effect
Trade-level controls
Market conditions controls
Clustering
Observations
Adjusted R2

(1)
Mean

0.18
0.20
0.02

(1)
0.18

-0.052
(0.382)
YES
YES
YES
Issue
2,436
0.055

Panel A: Univariate statistics

(2)
Median

0.13
0.07
-0.05

(3)
Mean

0.23
0.18
-0.04*

Panel B: Multivariate tests

(2)
0.18

-0.052
(0.344)
YES
YES
YES
Issuer
2,436
0.055

(3)
0.20

-0.079***
(0.005)
YES
YES
YES
Issue
2,436
0.217

(4)
Median

0.19
0.14
-0.05***

(4)
0.20

-0.079***
(0.006)
YES
YES
YES
Issuer
2,436
0.217

(5)
Mean

-0.10
-0.02
0.08*

(5)
-0.06

0.106*
(0.091)
YES
YES
YES
Issue
2,440
0.115

(6)
Median

-0.05
-0.03
0.02

(6)
-0.06

0.106
(0.101)
YES
YES
YES
Issuer
2,440
0.115

This table reports changes in block costs for bonds that experienced a transparency event. We include four events: 144A bonds that experienced a transparency event in 
June 2014 and public bonds that experienced a transparency event in March 2003, October 2004, and February 2005. We focus on the 16-month period surrounding 
the event and ’Post’ refers to trades that occur on or after the transparency event. To be included in the sample, bonds must have at least one block trade in the pre- and 
post-TRACE period. For both samples, we only retain observations with non-missing block initiator, block dealer, and receiver spread and price impact measures. 
Blocks are trades of $15 million or more. These filters yield 912 block trades for the June 2014 event, 622 block trades for the March 2003 event, 863 block trades for 
the October 2004 event, and 47 block trades for the February 2005 event. Panel A reports univariate statistics. Panel B reports multivariate tests. Regressions include 
trade-level and issue-level (the natural log of trade size and bond age, and indicators for on-the-run bonds and block trades intermediated by small dealers) and market 
controls (the trailing weekly corporate bond market index return, trailing weekly S&P index return, the change in the average three-month LIBOR interest rate, and the 
change in the VIX index over the previous week) and are estimated using issue-level fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the issue level in Columns (1), (3), and 
(5) and at the issuer level in Columns (2), (4), and (6). Dependent variable averages for the full sample are reported at the top of the regression and p-Values are 
reported below coefficients. Variables are winsored at the 1 % and 99 % levels. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, 
respectively.

participate in Dealer Block Sells are fully offset by the liquidity premium 
of initiating a block sale of comparable size. These findings align with 
Burdett and O’Hara’s (1987) prediction that, while receivers may incur 
losses on informed blocks, they still achieve cost savings by acting as 
counterparties to the block trades. This highlights the economic ratio-
nale  underlying  why  receivers  continue  to  participate  in  the  block 
market.

However,  our  results  reveal  a  potential  fragility:  if  information 
asymmetry  becomes  too  severe,  it  could  deter  receiver  participation. 
Fig. 3, Panel D shows receivers’ costs savings by permanent price impact 
decile, with the blue line indicating that cost savings for deciles 8 to 10 
(highest impact) are negative.24

We recognize that our trading cost model is calibrated using block 
trades of at least $15 million, whereas receiver trades typically involve 
smaller sizes, often below $15 million. Prior research in corporate bonds 
show that trading costs decrease with larger trade sizes (Edwards et al., 
2007; Bessembinder et al., 2018). Therefore, the imputed initiator costs 
derived  from  larger  block  trades  likely  underestimate  the  actual 
execution costs for smaller receiver trades. We do not extend our trading 
cost model to include smaller trades because accurate classification of 
initiator versus receiver trades becomes more challenging as trade sizes 
decrease.

In the second method, we calculate a hypothetical price (PHYP) for 
each block trade, reflecting the price that receivers would likely achieve 
to build or liquidate a typical position using TRACE transactions data. 
This  price  is  derived  from  VWAP  of  TRACE-reported  customer  trades 
across all dealers on the same market side as the receiver trades and then 
compared to the offsetting price (POFF) of the receiver trades associated 
with the block trade. For Dealer Block Buys, the savings are calculated as 

24 Along similar lines, Table 4 shows that, for block sizes between $15 and $20 
million, cost savings are negative.

18 

the  difference  between  the  hypothetical  price  and  the  receiver  offset 
price (POFF). Conversely, for Dealer Block Sells, savings are determined 
by the difference between the receiver offset price (POFF) and the hy-
pothetical price. Because the hypothetical price is calculated using all 
trades, while receiver trades are generally larger round lot trades of at 
least $1 million, this method could potentially overestimate the benefits 
receivers  achieve  through  the  block  market  process,  as  larger  trades 
might secure better terms than smaller TRACE trades.

Table 6, Panel B reports the cost savings based on hypothetical prices 
calculated using all trades in the week following the block week. The 
average receiver savings are 17 bp for Dealer Block Buys and 5 bp for 
Dealer Block Sells. These figures closely align with the higher trading 
cost savings reported for Dealer Block Buys and the more modest savings 
for  Dealer  Block  Sells  using  the  first  method,  suggesting  that  the 
magnitude of any potential bias from estimating hypothetical prices is 
likely small.

Similar to Table 3, Panel E, Table 6, Panel C reports average savings 
using alternate pre- and post-trade equilibrium values (PPRE and PPOST). 
The savings range from 10 bp to 22 bp for Dealer Block Buys and from 
0 bp to 11 bp for Dealer Block sells. The results suggest that receivers 
generally fare better in Dealer Block Buys, and at the very least, no worse 
in  Dealer  Block  Sells  –  even  when  information  effects  are  present  – 
compared  to  building  or  liquidating  a  similar  position  outside  of  the 
block market process.

In Table 6, Panel C, Column (4), we introduce a significant modifi-
cation:  the  hypothetical  price  is  now  calculated  based  on  the  VWAP 
across all dealers during the week before the block trade. This analysis 
offers  a  valuable  perspective  on  receiver  savings,  reflecting  the  trade 
terms available to receivers before the block trade’s information affects 
prices. For  both  Block Dealer Buys  and  Sells, the  potential savings in 
Column  (4)  are  positive  and  of  similar  magnitude  at  11–12  bp.  The 
symmetry of savings reported in Panel C, Column (4), combined with the 
asymmetry of savings reported in Panel B, underscores that receivers are 

​
​
​
​
​
S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

unable to anticipate information effects, leading to asymmetrical sav-
ings when they participate after the trade report. Notably, when per-
manent  price  impact  is  substantial,  receivers  are  relatively  better  off 
liquidating a position before the block trade is reported.

5. Block trade disclosure and receiver outcomes

The  results  suggest  that  while  receivers  benefit  from  trading  cost 
savings in the block market, these benefits diminish when information 
asymmetry is high. Market transparency, a key factor influencing the 
trading  environment,  affects  the  extent  to  which  dealers  enjoy  infor-
mation advantages in bilateral negotiations with receivers. During our 
sample  period,  the  corporate  bond  market  experienced  various  trade 
reporting  rule  changes,  generally  leading  to  greater  transparency. 
However, these changes have been controversial, with industry groups 
often opposing the reporting of block trades. In this section, we examine 
the impact of trade disclosure regulation on the block market.

5.1. Transparency events that introduce post-trade reporting

Our  analysis  begins  with  transparency  events,  specifically  the 
introduction of mandatory reporting of corporate bond trades to FIN-
RA’s TRACE system. Transparency was introduced in stages, beginning 
with trade report initiation for a small group of actively traded bonds in 
July 2002. This analysis focuses on public bonds with staggered trade 
reporting in 2003, 2004, and 2005, as well as non-public 144A bonds in 
2014. The dissemination dates for these bonds are as follows: March 3, 
2003,  October  1,  2004,  February  7,  2005,  and  June  27,  2014, 
respectively.

For bonds with TRACE initiation in March 2003, the period before 
trade report initiation is restricted to 8 months, given the TRACE system 
was implemented in July 2002. Therefore, we select an 8-month period 
after transparency and maintain a consistent 16-month window for all 
four samples. Specifically, for each sample, we study a 16-month period 
before and after the initiation of trade reporting.25 To be included in our 
sample, a bond must have at least one block trade in both the period 
before and the period after transparency. We retain block trades that are 
not marked as agency trades, are not identified as prearranged blocks by 
our algorithm, have a block trade price of at least $5.00, and have non- 
missing trading cost measures. These filters yield 622 block trades in 132 
issues for the 2003 sample, 863 block trades in 192 issues for the 2004 
sample, 47 block trades in 9 issues for the 2005 sample, and 912 block 
trades in 183 issues for the 2014 sample.

Table 7 reports the results of the impact of transparency events on 
initiator  costs, dealer  spreads,  and receiver  spreads for  our  combined 
sample of block trades. Panel A reports univariate analyses of trading 
costs before and after TRACE initiation, while Panel B reports similar 
analyses in a multivariate setting. Post-Transparency is an indicator var-
iable that equals one for block trades conducted after the initiation of 
trade reporting and zero otherwise. We implement issue-level fixed ef-
fects in the regressions, allowing us to estimate the within-bond impact of 
trade reporting. We also include trade-level controls such as the natural 
log of trade size and whether the intermediary is a small dealer, an in-
dicator for on-the-run bonds, and market controls including the trailing 

25 Specifically, for bonds with TRACE initiation in March 2003, we study the 
16-month period from July 2002 (when TRACE was implemented) to October 
2003,  defining  the  period  on  or  after  March  2003  as  post-TRACE.  For  bonds 
with  TRACE  initiation  in  October  2004,  we  study  the  16-month  period  from 
February 2004 to May 2005, defining the period on or after October 2004 as 
post-TRACE. For bonds with TRACE initiation in February 2005, we study the 
16-month period from June 2004 to September 2005, defining the period on or 
after February 2005 as post-TRACE. For 144A bonds with TRACE initiation in 
June  2014, we  study the 16-month  period from  November  2013 to  February 
2015, defining the period on or after June 2014 as post-TRACE.

weekly  corporate  bond  market  index  return,  the  trailing  weekly  S&P 
index return, the change in the average three-month LIBOR interest rate, 
and the change in the VIX index over the previous week. To account for 
dealer inventory risk, we report results with standard errors clustered at 
the issue level, given the risk is influenced by each issue’s distinct trading 
activity and anticipated demand from receivers, which can vary across 
issues from the same issuer.26 We also report results with standard errors 
clustered at the issuer level to capture information-driven trading tied to 
firm-level  factors.  Averages  of  the  dependent  variables  are  reported 
above the regression results, with p-values shown below the coefficients.
Theoretical models (e.g., Pagano and Roell, 1996; Green et al., 2007) 
predict that opaque markets create opportunities for dealers to exploit 
their information advantage over customers. The univariate results in 
Table  7 Panel  A  indicate  that  average  dealer  spreads  for  facilitating 
blocks decrease from 23 bp to 18 bp after trade report initiation, while 
the  regression  results  in  Panel  B,  columns  (3)  and  (4)  show  an  8  bp 
reduction in dealer spreads. In both panels, this decline is statistically 
significant  and  economically  large,  as  an  8  bp  reduction  represents 
one-third  of  the  pre-transparency  dealer  spreads  of  23  bp.  Average 
initiator costs in Panel A, column (1) do not differ meaningfully before 
and after trade reporting, averaging about 19 bp. Similarly, in Panel B, 
columns (1) and (2), the coefficient on post-Transparency is not statisti-
cally  significant.  Therefore,  increased  transparency,  while  reducing 
dealer spreads, has no significant impact on trade execution costs for 
block initiators.

Receivers  appear  to  be  the  primary  beneficiaries  of  trade  report 
initiation in the block market. As shown in Panel A, column (5), average 
receiver spreads increase from (cid:0) 10 bp before trade reporting to (cid:0) 2 bps 
after, reflecting a marked improvement. In the multivariate analysis, the 
regression  coefficient  of  11  bp  in  Panel  B  indicates  an  economically 
significant  improvement  in  receiver  outcomes  relative  to  the  pre- 
transparency  spread  of  (cid:0) 10  bp.  This  improvement  is  statistically  sig-
nificant at the 10 % level in column (5), but not statistically significant in 
column (6). However, following trade report initiation, some receiver 
trades  may  not  fully  capture  the  benefits  of  transparency  due  to 
permissible  delays  in  block  trade  reporting  –  a  topic  we  will  explore 
further in the next section.

Prior studies on the corporate bond market generally conclude that 
trade report initiation reduces dealer spreads and improves execution 
costs  for customers.  Our  study contributes  further  nuance to this  evi-
dence by examining the block market, where we find that the effects of 
trade report initiation vary by customer-type, reflecting their informa-
tion  disadvantages  during  bilateral  negotiations  with  dealers.  In  line 
with theoretical models (e.g., Madhavan, 1995), we show that manda-
tory  trade  reporting  primarily  benefits  less-informed  customers  (re-
ceivers), while the outcomes for more informed customers (initiators) 
remain largely unaffected.

We  further  investigate whether  dealers  reduce  their  facilitation of 
block trades in response to narrower spreads after trade report initiation 
in Appendix Table 6. Both univariate and multivariate analyses indicate 
that block volume relative to total volume remain stable, suggesting no 
decline in dealer participation with trade report initiation.27 However, 

26 Our  block  trade  sample  displays  significant  within-issuer  variation  in  key 
issue  attributes  such  as  issue  size,  age,  time  to  maturity,  and liquidity  in  the 
period prior to the block date.
27 The  analysis  in  Appendix  Table  6 is  based  on  block  activity  averaged  by 
cusip-week. The control variables in the regressions reported in Panel B, column 
(1) include the trailing weekly S&P index, the change in average three-month 
LIBOR  interest  rate,  and  the  VIX  index  change  over  the  previous  week.  The 
model is estimated with issue fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the 
issue level. Columns (2)-(4) include additional controls: the natural log of trade 
size, bond age, indicators for on-the-run bonds and block trades intermediated 
by small dealers, the trailing weekly corporate bond market index return, and 
the trailing weekly S&P index return.

19 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 8 
Trade reporting delay regimes and block trading costs.

Panel A: Summary statistics, by period

(1)
July 2002-Sep. 2003
75 Min

(2)
October 2003-Sep. 2004
45 Min

(3)
October 2004-June 2005
30 Min

(4)
July 2005-June 2006
15 Min

N

1,567

1,214

1,249

1,305

- Before Report
- After Report
Chg. Dealer Spread

- Before Report
- After Report
Chg. Receiver Spread

0.30
0.22
-0.08***

-0.16
-0.07
0.08

Dealer Spread

0.16
0.11
-0.06**

Receiver Spread

-0.08
-0.02
0.06

(1)

(2)

(3)

July 2002-June 2006

Panel B: Multivariate tests

0.26
0.15
-0.11***

-0.12
0.01
0.11*

(4)

0.23
0.18
-0.05**

-0.02
0.00
0.05

(5)

2021

(5)
2021
15 Min

4,255

0.22
0.19
-0.03***

-0.08
-0.05
0.03

(6)

Dealer Spread

Receiver Spread

Dealer Spread

Receiver Spread

Dependent Variable Average

0.20

Trades after Report

Block-Level Fixed Effect
Offset Trade Controls
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

-0.075***
(0.000)
YES
NO
10,670
0.216

0.20

-0.054***
(0.000)
YES
YES
10,670
0.224

-0.06

0.074***
(0.000)
YES
NO
10,670
0.780

-0.06

0.049***
(0.002)
YES
YES
10,670
0.782

0.21

-0.029***
(0.001)
YES
NO
8,510
0.166

-0.06

0.027***
(0.010)
YES
NO
8,510
0.809

This analysis considers block trading costs over four regulatory periods that reduced the time dealers were required to report trades and in 2021 (the most recent year in 
the sample). To construct the sample, we exclude blocks that are reported >24 h following the trade execution time and block trades for bonds that are not yet 
disseminated. We require an offsetting trade by a receiver both before and after the trade is reported and we compute the weighted-average spread for both periods, 
resulting in two observations for each block trade. In Panel A, Column 1 reports statistics when trades were required to be reported within 75 min. Columns 2 and 3 
report statistics when trades were required to be reported within 45 and 30 min, respectively. Column 4 reports statistics in the early one-year period when trades were 
required to be reported within 15 min. Column 5 reports statistics in 2021. Panel B reports regressions with a ’Trades after Report’ indicator for dealer and receiver 
spreads after the trade has been reported. Columns 1–4 use data over the July 2002 to June 2006 period and Columns 5–6 use data over the January 2021 to November 
2021 period. All regressions include block-level fixed effects and in Columns 2 and 4 we also include controls for the average offsetting trade size and the percent of 
offsetting trades with a customer in the pre- and post-report periods. Standard errors are estimated using the Huber-White sandwich estimator. All variables are 
winsorized at the 1 % and 99 % levels. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

with mandated trade reporting, dealers offset a larger portion of block 
trades within  the block week and are more likely to fully offset their 
positions. This shift indicates that while dealers continue to intermedi-
ate blocks, they exhibit heightened sensitivity to the increased inventory 
risk associated with holding these positions.

5.2. Delay events that shorten the trade reporting timeframe

As  per  regulatory  rules,  FINRA-registered  dealers  are  required  to 
report  all  completed  corporate  bond  trades  (customers  do  not  report 
trades)  to  FINRA’s  TRACE  system.  The  TRACE  system  disseminates 
trade information, including price and capped size, immediately upon 
receipt  of  a  trade  report  from  a  dealer.  Notably,  FINRA  stipulates  a 
maximum permissible delay between the execution of the trade and its 
reporting to TRACE. In the block market, this delay enables dealers to 
leverage information observed during their bilateral negotiations with 
initiator, allowing them to potentially offset a portion of the block at a 
favorable price before the block trade is publicly reported.

In this section, we study delay events, focusing on the impact of the 
rules  governing  the  trade  reporting  timeframe  to  the  TRACE  system. 
During our sample period, FINRA shortened the reporting delay in three 
stages, from 75 min to 45 min, then to 30 min, and finally to the current 
15 min. We examine block trades during these four reporting regimes: 
July  2002-September  2003  (75-minute  reporting);  October  2003- 
September 2004 (45-minute reporting); October 2004-June 2005 (30- 
minute reporting); and July 2005-June 2006 (15-minute reporting).

For this analysis, we start with our original sample of 205,104 block 
trades. We then exclude block trades for bonds that were not yet eligible 

for TRACE-dissemination in each regime, as well as those reported >24 
h  after  the  execution  timestamp  (which  are  likely  errors).  We  retain 
block trades with at least one receiver trade both before and after the 
block  trade  report  timestamp.28 For  each  reporting  regime,  we  sepa-
rately  calculate  the  cost  measures  for  receiver  trades  with  execution 
timestamps occurring before and after the block trade report timestamp. 
Dealer  and  receiver  spreads  are  calculated  using  trade-size  weighted 
average prices, resulting in two observations for each block trade. Using 
this approach, we implement block-level fixed effects in the regressions, 
allowing  us  to  estimate  the  within-block  impact  on  receivers  upon 
observing  the  block  trade,  while  controlling  for  trade-specific,  bond- 
specific, and market wide factors on the spread measures.29

The results are reported in Table 8, Panel A. We find that receivers 

28 During the relevant period (the four reporting regimes from July 2002 to 
June  2006)  there  are  22,695  blocks  trades  that  are  TRACE-dissemination 
eligible.  Within  this  sample,  14,717  (65%)  do  not  have  an  offsetting  trade 
before the block trade report, and 2,643 (12%) do not have an offsetting trade 
after  the  block  trade  report.  Appendix  Table  7 presents  results  analogous  to 
Table 8, Panel A without the filter requiring a trade both before and after the 
block  trade  report.  We  find  that  the  results  are  qualitatively  similar  to  those 
reported in Table 8.
29 FINRA  initiated  TRACE  reporting  for  some  corporate  bonds  in  October 
2003. The maximum stipulated delay was reduced from 75 minutes to 45 mi-
nutes  in  March  2003.  This  overlap  does  not  affect  the  trade  report  delay 
analysis,  which  employs  a  within-block  setting  for  the  sample  of  TRACE- 
dissemination  eligible  bonds;  however,  this  overlap  could  potentially  impact 
the mandatory trade reporting analysis discussed in Section 7.1.

20 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Table 9 
Block trade reporting delay and offsetting behavior.

Panel A: By reporting regime - univariate

(1)
July 2002-Sep. 2003
75 Min

(2)
October 2003-Sep. 2004
45 Min

(3)
October 2004-June 2005
30 Min

(4)
July 2005-June 2006
15 Min

Reporting Delay of Block (in minutes)
% Reported w/ in 75 minutes
% Reported w/ in 45 minutes
% Reported w/ in 30 minutes
% Reported w/ in 15 minutes
% Offset Volume Before Block Report
% of Block Trade Offset by Day 5
% of Blocks Fully Offset

25.08
92%
81%
75%
70%
20%
54%
34%

17.76
93%
90%
88%
82%
17%
53%
33%

15.14
94%
92%
90%
86%
20%
54%
35%

13.72
96%
94%
93%
90%
20%
54%
34%

(5)
2021
15 Min

14.58
95%
94%
94%
93%
20%
64%
40%

Dependent Variable

45 Minute Regime

30 Minute Regime

15 Minute Regime

Trade-level controls
Issue-level controls
Market conditions controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

Panel B: By reporting regime - multivariate

(1)
% Block Volume / Total Volume

(2)
% of Block Trade Offset by Day 5

(3)
% of Blocks Fully Offset

(4)
% Offset Volume Before Report

-0.107
(0.201)
-0.226
(0.107)
-0.404*
(0.058)
NO
YES
YES
453,544
0.040

-0.007
(0.524)
0.015
(0.400)
0.020
(0.486)
YES
YES
YES
22,695
0.013

0.015
(0.247)
0.037*
(0.072)
0.027
(0.398)
YES
YES
YES
22,695
0.006

0.001
(0.947)
0.006
(0.703)
-0.024
(0.334)
YES
YES
YES
22,695
0.018

This analysis considers dealers’ block reporting and offsetting behavior. We start with the sample of block trades described in Table I Panel B then we exclude block 
trades that are reported >24 h following the trade execution time and block trades for bonds that are not yet disseminated. Panel A reports statistics on the timing of 
dealer trade reporting for the four reporting regimes used in Table VIII and for 2021 (the most recent year in our sample). Panel B reports regressions of block activity 
and dealer offsetting behavior with indicators for whether the block occurred during the 45-minute, 30-minute, or 15-minute reporting regime and the 75-minute 
regime is the reference period. Regressions are estimated over the July 2002-June 2006 period. Regressions include trade-level (except the regression in Column 
1) and issue-level (the natural log of trade size, bond age, issue size, and indicators for bonds issued by financial firms, on-the-run bonds, and block trades inter-
mediated by small dealers) and market controls (the trailing weekly corporate bond market index return, trailing weekly S&P index return, the average three-month 
LIBOR interest rate, and the VIX index over the previous week) and are estimated using robust standard errors. Regressions in Column 1 are based on cusip-week 
trading activity and do not include trade-level or small dealer controls. All variables are winsorized at the 1 % and 99 % levels. ***, **, and * indicate statistical 
significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

obtain better terms on offsetting trades that occur after the report of the 
block trade compared to those before the report. Specifically, in the July 
2002-September 2003 regime, receivers lose 16 bp on offsetting trades 
that occur prior to block trade report but lose only 7 bp on offsetting 
trades that occur after block trade report, representing an improvement 
in trade terms of about 50 %. These improvements are consistent across 
all reporting regimes, with receiver spread improvements ranging from 
5  bp  to  11  bp.  Dealer  spreads  exhibit  a  similar  pattern,  but  with  the 
opposite sign. For example, in the July 2002-September 2003 regime, as 
shown in column (1), dealer spreads decline from 30 bp to 22 bps.30

Table 8, Panel B presents the impact of delay events on dealer and 
receiver spreads in a multivariate setting. Like the univariate analyses, 
we  study  within-block  differences  in  spread  measures  by  comparing 
receiver trades executed before and after the block trade report. ‘Trades 
after report’ is an indicator variable that equals one for receiver trades 
executing post-report and zero otherwise. All regressions are estimated 
with block-level fixed effects. Columns (2) and (4) include controls for 
the average size of offsetting trade and the percentage of these trades 
with a customer counterparty before and after the block trade report. 
The dependent variable averages are reported at the top of the regres-
sion tables and p-values are shown below coefficients.

The  results  in  Table  8,  Panel  B,  column  (1)  suggest  that  dealer 
spreads are reduced by an average of 7.5 bp on receiver trades that occur 
after the block trade report compared to those before the report. Dealer 

spreads average 20 bp for this sample of block trades, implying that this 
reduction is economically large. In column (3), the results suggest that 
receivers  obtain  better  terms  on  offsetting  trades  that  occur  after  the 
block  trade  report.  With  receiver  spreads  averaging  (cid:0) 6  bp  for  our 
sample, this reduction of 7.4 bp is also economically significant.

Our  analyses  offer  empirical  support  for  the  primary  mechanism 
envisioned in theoretical models concerning how greater transparency 
levels the information playing field. These models suggest that receivers 
are informationally disadvantaged during bilateral negotiations with the 
dealers. Timely reporting of the block trade allows receivers, to whom 
the  dealer  distributes  the  block,  to  account  for  the  potential  adverse 
price effects of a block trade.31

5.3. Do delay events change dealer behavior?

We next examine how dealers change their trading behavior when 
the  trade  report  timeframe  is  shortened  across  the  four  reporting  re-
gimes in Table 9. The sample utilized in this table is constructed based 
on the criteria described for Table 8, with one exception –  we do not 
require an offsetting trade in both the period before and after the block 
trade report. Table 9 Panel A reports statistics on compliance with the 
reporting rule. In the July 2002-September 2003 regime, 92 % of trades 

30 Similar to the robustness analysis reported in Table 5, the delayed reporting 
results are robust to the exclusion of receiver trades that occur more than two 
hours prior to the block trade execution time (but on the same day).

31 Because  trade  reporting  timeliness  is  still  debated  by market  participants 
and regulators, in Table 8, we also report the results for the most recent year 
(2021) in our sample, which indicate similar patterns (reduced dealer spreads 
and  increased  receiver  spreads)  to  those  documented  in  the  four  earlier  sub- 
periods.

21 

​
​
​
S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

are reported within the stipulated maximum delay of 75 min, but only 
70 % are reported within 15 min. As the trade report timeframe drops 
over time to 15 min, 90 % of trades are reported within the stipulated 
15-minute period. Thus, dealers respond to changes in reporting rules by 
reporting trades with less delay, as intended by regulators.

In each regime, dealers offset about one-fifth of the block position 
before the block trade is reported. Specifically, during the July 2002- 
September 2003 (75-minute reporting) period, they offset about 20 % 
of the block position prior to the report. This percentage is 17 % in the 
October 2003-September 2004 (45-minute reporting) period, 20 % in 
the October 2004-June 2005 (30-minute reporting) period, and 20 % in 
the July 2005-June 2006 (15-minute reporting) period. Over the block 
week, dealers offset about half the block position, with about one-third 
of  the  blocks  being  fully  offset  in  all  four  regimes.  By  the  end  of  the 
sample  period  (2021),  offset  activity  increases  significantly  –  dealers 
offset  about  two-thirds  of  the  block  position,  and  nearly  40  %  of  the 
blocks are fully offset.

Table 9, Panel B presents the results of the impact of delay events on 
dealer  behavior  in  a  multivariate  setting,  where  indicator  variables 
capture whether the block trade occurred during the 45, 30, or 15-min-
ute reporting regime, with the 75-minute regime serving as the reference 
period.  The  regressions  are  estimated  over  the  July  2002-June  2006 
period.32 Column (1) indicates no material reduction in block activity 
when transitioning from the 75 to the 45-minute regime or from the 45 
to  30-minute  regime.  However,  there  is  about  12  %  reduction  when 
moving from the 30 to 15-minute reporting regime. Results in columns 
(2)  and  (3)  suggest  that  shorter  reporting  delay  do  not  significantly 
affect the dealer’s offsetting behavior over the block week. Notably, in 
column (4), the coefficient on % Offset Volume Before Report is not sta-
tistically different across the regimes, despite the average block trade 
reporting  delay  decreasing  from  25  min  in  the  July  2002-September 
2003 regime to 14 min in the July 2005-June 2006 regime.

These findings suggest that dealers speed up the offsetting of block 
positions  as  the  trade  reporting  timeframe  shortens  across  the  three 
stages. This behavior aligns with our earlier findings that dealers obtain 
better  terms on  receiver  trades  executed  before  the  block  trade  is  re-
ported. Additionally, dealer behavior in 2021 closely mirrors that of the 
July 2005 to June 2006 period, both governed by a 15-minute reporting 
requirement.33 This similarity suggests that our findings are relevant for 
recent regulatory initiatives concerning trade reporting delay in fixed 
income markets.

6. Conclusions and implications

This study highlights the important role of receiving investors in the 
block market. We develop a methodology to identify a comprehensive 
sample  of  205,104  corporate  bond  block  trades  and  690,418  related 
receiver trades from 2002 to 2021. Using this sample, we test theoretical 
predictions  about  the  impact  of  the  information  environment  on 

32 Regressions include trade-level (except the regression in Column (1)) and 
issue-level (the natural log of trade size, bond age, issue size, and indicators for 
bonds  issued  by  financial  firms,  on-the-run  bonds,  and  block  trades  inter-
mediated by small dealers) and market controls (the trailing weekly corporate 
bond market index return, trailing weekly S&P index return, the average three- 
month LIBOR interest rate, and the VIX index over the previous week) and are 
estimated using robust standard errors. Regressions in Column (1) are based on 
cusip-week  trading  activity  and  do  not  include  trade-level  or  small  dealer 
controls.
33 Specifically, in Table 9, the average reporting delay is 14.6 minutes in July 
2005-June  2006  regime  vs.  13.7  minutes  in  2021;  the  percentage  of  block 
trades that are in reporting compliance is 93% vs. 90%; the percentage of block 
volume offset within the block week is 64% vs. 54%; the percentage of block 
trades  that  are  fully  offset  within  the  block  week  is  40%  vs.  34%;  and  the 
percentage of block volume offset before the block trade is publicly reported is 
20% for both periods.

receivers – a topic that has received limited attention in the literature. 
Consistent  with  Burdett  and  O’Hara  (1987),  our  results  suggest  that 
receivers benefit  by  efficiently establishing  or liquidating positions at 
lower costs through offsetting trades with block dealers. This provides a 
clear economic rationale for receiver participation in the block market. 
However, we also find that receivers primarily bear adverse selection 
costs, whereas dealers, who have access to information about the block 
initiator’s  identity  and  trade  terms,  can  better  anticipate  informed 
trading. This outcome aligns with the market’s institutional structure, 
where  receivers  remain  the  least  informed  party  in  the  block  trade 
process.

We  also  examine  the  effects  of  regulatory  changes  over  our  two- 
decade  sample  period,  focusing  on  the  impact  of  block  trade  disclo-
sure on market participants. Our analysis of the transparency events that 
introduce post-trade reporting for corporate bonds suggests that trans-
parency’s effects vary by customer type. Less-informed receivers benefit 
from transparency, while outcomes for better-informed initiators appear 
largely unchanged. Additionally, we examine delay events pertaining to 
FINRA’s phased reduction of the maximum permissible delay between 
trade  execution  and  reporting.  Our  findings  empirically  support  the 
theoretical mechanisms suggesting that timely trade reporting improves 
customer outcomes by partially revealing the dealer’s private informa-
tion,  thereby  improving  customers’  ability  to  negotiate  better  trade 
terms.

Despite  the  broader  movement  towards  increased  transparency  in 
fixed income markets, regulators have recently considered proposals to 
delay  the  reporting  of  block  trades  in  corporate  bonds  and  swaps.  In 
June  2019,  FINRA  proposed  a  pilot  program  to  extend  the  reporting 
delay for corporate bond block trades from 15 min to 48 h, following a 
recommendation from SEC’s Fixed Income Market Structure Advisory 
Committee (FIMSAC). Much of the regulatory discussions have focused 
on the potential benefits of delayed trade reporting for block initiators 
and dealers.34 Our study provides evidence on the economic motivations 
behind dealer support for this proposal, showing that longer reporting 
delays  provide  dealers  with  more  time  to  offset  positions,  thereby 
improving  their  spreads.  However,  these  delays  adversely  affect  re-
ceivers, to whom the dealer distributes the block.

We also offer guidance on a recently adopted SEC rule that shortens 
the  trade  reporting  timeframe  from  the  current  15-minutes  to  one 
minute after trade execution in various fixed-income markets. Our re-
sults suggest that shorter delay will provide receivers with timely, value- 
relevant information during negotiations with dealers. However, we also 
observe  that  dealers,  across  all  reporting  regimes,  consistently  offset 
about 20 % of the block position before the block trade is reported. As 
the  new  rule  is  implemented,  regulators  should  carefully  evaluate 
whether  a  one-minute  delay  allows  dealers–especially  smaller 
ones–sufficient time to manage block positions effectively.

Our analysis shows that block market activity has remained stable 
throughout our sample period, suggesting that greater transparency has 
not led dealers to withdraw from the block market, even as it enhances 
market  fairness  for  other  participants.  Nonetheless,  regulators  should 
monitor whether shorter reporting delays could eventually reduce block 
market activity, potentially disadvantaging large buy-side institutions. 
As  Bessembinder  et  al.  (2020)  note,  the  optimal  transparency  regime 
may vary across fixed income markets. Given the differences in clientele 
and trading frequency among asset classes affected by the SEC’s newly 
adopted rule –  such as corporate bonds, agency debt, asset backed se-
curities  and  agency  pass-through  mortgage-backed  securities  –  cross- 
asset  analysis  will  be  essential  to  understand  the  rule’s  impact. 

34 See  comment  letters  by  SIFMA  (https://www.finra.org/sites/default/fil 
es/2019-06/19-12_Sifma_Comment.pdf
(12/5/2024)  and  by  Harris,  Ven-
kataraman and Walter (https://www.sec.gov/comments/265-30/26530-42681 
51-173129.pdf) (12/5/2024) for a range of perspectives on FIMSAC proposed 
pilot to delay reporting of block trade.

22 

S. Jacobsen and K. Venkataraman                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 170 (2025) 104061 

Finally, our findings on the benefits of timely trade disclosure are rele-
vant for regulatory efforts aimed at increasing transparency in European 
fixed income markets and in aggregate for U.S. Treasury securities and 
OTC U.S. equity markets.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Stacey  Jacobsen:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original 
draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Software,  Resources, 
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisi-
tion,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization.  Kumar  Ven-
kataraman:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft, 
Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project 
administration,  Methodology, 
Investigation,  Funding  acquisition, 
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  the  following  financial  interests/personal  re-
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:

Kumar  Venkataraman  was  a  visiting  economist  at  the  Office  of 
Chief Economist at FINRA, and acknowledges financial support for other 
projects. He provides expert witness services to a variety of clients. He 
served  as  one  of  the  two  academics  on  SEC’s  Fixed  Income  Market 
Structure  Advisory  Committee  (FIMSAC)  that  recommended  a  pilot 
proposal in 2019 to delay reporting of block trades (he voted against the 
proposal) in corporate bonds.

Stacey  Jacobsen  has  no  known  competing  financial  interests  or 

personal relationships to declare.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104061.

Data availability

Receiving  Investors  in  the  Block  Market  for  Corporate  Bonds 

(Reference data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Anand, A., Jotikasthira, C., Venkataraman, K., 2021. Mutual fund trading style and bond 

market fragility. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (6), 2993–3044.

Back, K., Liu, R., Teguia, A., 2020. Signaling in OTC markets: Benefits and costs of 

transparency. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 55 (1), 1–59.

Barclay, M.J., Warner, J.B., 1993. Stealth trading and volatility: Which trades move 

prices? J. Financ. Econ. 34 (3), 281–305.

Bao, J., O’Hara, M., Zhou, X., 2018. The volcker rule and corporate bond market making 

in times of stress. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (1), 95–113.

Bessembinder, H., Venkataraman, K., 2004. Does an electronic stock exchange need an 

upstairs market? J. Financ. Econ. 73 (1), 3–26.

Bessembinder, H., Maxwell, W., Venkataraman, K., 2006. Market transparency, liquidity 
externalities, and institutional trading costs in corporate bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 82, 
251–288.

Bessembinder, H., Jacobsen, S., Maxwell, W., Venkataraman, K., 2018. Capital 
commitment and illiquidity in corporate bonds. J. Financ. 73, 1615–1661.

Bessembinder, H., Jacobsen, S., Maxwell, W., Venkataraman, K., 2022. Overallocation 
and secondary market outcomes in corporate bond offerings. J. Financ. Econ. 146, 
444–474.

Bloomfield, R., O’Hara, M., 2000. Can transparent markets survive? J. Financ. Econ. 55 

(3), 425–459.

Booth, G., Lin, J., Martikainen, K., Tse, T., 2001. Trading and pricing in upstairs and 

downstairs stock markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 15, 1111–1135.

Burdett, K., O’Hara, M., 1987. Building blocks: An introduction to block trading. J. Bank. 

Financ. 11 (2), 193–212.

Cai, F., Han, S., Li, D., Li, Y., 2019. Institutional herding and its price impact: Evidence 

from the corporate bond market. J. Financ. Econ. 131, 139–167.

Chalmers, J., Liu, Y., Wang, Z.J., 2021. The difference a day makes: Timely disclosure 

and trading efficiency in the muni market. J. Financ. Econ. 139, 313–335.

Chan, L., Lakonishok, J., 1995. The behavior of stock prices around institutional trades. 

J. Financ. 50 (4), 1147–1174.

Choi, J., Huh, Y., Shin, S., 2024. Customer liquidity provision: Implications for corporate 

bond transaction costs. Manage. Sci. 70 (1), 187–206.

Czech, R., Pinter, G., 2022. Informed trading and the dynamics of client-dealer 

connections in the corporate bond market. Working Paper Available at SSRN.

Dick-Nielsen, J., Rossi, M., 2019. The cost of immediacy for corporate bonds. Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 32 (1), 1–41.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Song, Z., 2017. The value of trading relationships in 

turbulent times. J. Financ. Econ. 124, 266–284.

Easley, D., O’Hara, M., 1987. Price, trade size, and information in securities markets. 

J. Financ. Econ. 21, 123–142.

Edwards, A., Harris, L., Piwowar, M., 2007. Corporate bond market transactions costs 

and transparency. J. Finance. 62, 1421–1451.

Fang, C., 2024. Monetary policy amplification through bond fund flows. Working Paper 

Available at SSRN.

Gemmill, G., 1996. Transparency and liquidity: a study of block trades on the London 
stock exchange under different publication rules. J. Financ. 51 (5), 1765–1790.

Goldstein, M., Hotchkiss, E., Sirri, E., 2007. Transparency and liquidity: a controlled 

experiment on corporate bonds. Rev. Financ. Stud. 20, 235–273.

Goldstein, M., Hotchkiss, E., Nikolova, S., 2021. Dealer behavior and the trading of 

newly issued corporate bonds. Working Paper Available at SSRN.

Goldstein, M., Hotchkiss, E., 2020. Providing liquidity in an illiquid market: Dealer 

behavior in U.S. corporate bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 135 (1), 16–40.

Green, R., Hollifield, B., Schürhoff, N., 2007. Financial intermediation and the costs of 

trading in an opaque market. Rev. Financ. Stud. 20, 275–314.

Grossman, S., 1992. The informational role of upstairs and downstairs markets. J. Bus. 

65, 509–529.

Harris, L., 1992. Consolidation, fragmentation, segmentation, and regulation. Working 

Paper Available at SSRN.

Harris, L., 2016. Transaction costs, trade throughs, and riskless principal trading in 

corporate bond markets. Working Paper Available at SSRN.

Hendershott, T., Li, D., Livdan, D., Schurhoff, N., 2020. Relationship trading in otc 

markets. J. Financ. 75, 683–734.

Hendershott, T., Li, D., Livdan, D., Schurhoff, N., 2022. True cost of immediacy. Working 

Paper Available at SSRN.

Hollifield, B., Neklyudov, A., Spatt, C., 2017. Bid-ask spreads, trading networks, and the 

pricing of securitizations. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30, 3048–3085.

Hollifield, B., Neklyudov, A., Spatt, C., 2020. Volume and intermediation in corporate 

bond markets. Working Paper Available at SSRN.

Hotchkiss, E., Ronen, T., 2002. The informational efficiency of the corporate bond 

market: An intraday analysis. Rev. Financ. Stud. 15, 1325–1354.

Jurkatis, S., Schrimpf, A., Todorov, K., Vause, N., 2024. Relationship discounts in 

corporate bond trading. Working Paper Available at SSRN.

Kargar, M., Lester, B., Plante, S., Weill, P., 2022. Sequential search in corporate bonds. 

Working Paper Available at SSRN.

Keim, D.B., Madhavan, A., 1996. The upstairs market for large-block transactions: 

Analysis and measurement of price effects. Rev. Financ. Stud. 9, 1–36.

Kraus, A., Stoll, H., 1972. Price impact of block trading on the New York stock exchange. 

J. Financ. 27 (3), 569–588.

Li, D., Schurhoff, N., 2019. Dealer networks. J. Financ. 74, 91–144.
Li, J., O’Hara, M., Rapp, A.C., Zhou, X., 2023. Bond market illiquidity: Is portfolio 

trading the solution? Working Paper Available at SSRN.

Madhavan, A., 1995. Consolidation, fragmentation, and the disclosure of trading 

information. Rev. Financ. Stud. 10 (4), 1035–1064.

Madhavan, A., 2000. Market microstructure: a survey. J. Financ. Markets 3, 205–258.
Madhavan, A., Cheng, M., 1997. In search of liquidity: Block trades in the upstairs and 

downstairs market. Rev. Financ. Stud. 10, 175–203.

Naik, Y., Neuberger, A., Viswanathan, S., 1999. Trade disclosure regulation in markets 

with negotiated trades. Rev. Financ. Stud. 12 (4), 873–900.

Nikolova, S., Wang, L., Wu, J., 2020. Institutional allocations in the primary market for 

corporate bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 137, 470–490.

O’Hara, M., Wang, Y., Zhou, X., 2018. The execution quality of corporate bonds. 

J. Financ. Econ. 130, 308–326.

O’Hara, M., Zhou, X., 2021. The anatomy of a liquidity crisis: Corporate bonds in the 

covid-19 crisis. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (1), 46–68.

Pagano, M., Roell, A., 1996. Transparency and liquidity: a comparison of auction and 

dealer markets with informed trading. J. Financ. 51 (2), 579–611.

Seppi, D., 1990. Equilibrium block trading and asymmetric information. J. Financ. 45, 

73–94.

Schultz, P., 2012. The market for new issues of municipal bonds: the roles of 

transparency and limited access to retail investors. J. Financ. Econ. 106, 492–512.

Schultz, P., 2017. Inventory management by corporate bond dealers. Working Paper 

Available at SSRN.

Schultz, P., Song, Z., 2019. Transparency and dealer networks: Evidence from the 

initiation of post-trade reporting in mortgage-backed security market. J. Financ. 
Econ. 133, 113–133.

Trebbi, F., Xiao, K., 2019. Regulation and market liquidity. Manage. Sci. 65, 1949–1968.
Wei, J., Zhou, X., 2016. Informed trading in corporate bonds prior to earnings 

announcements. Financ. Manage. 45, 641–674.

23 

