Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Extracting extrapolative beliefs from market prices: An augmented
present-value approach✩
Stefano Cassella a
a Tilburg University, Warandelaan 2, Tilburg, 5037 AB, The Netherlands
b Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 11 Yuk Choi Rd, Hong Kong, China
c Purdue University, 610 Purdue Mall, West Lafayette, 47907, United States
d Tsinghua University, Huanggang Road, Huafu Street, Shenzhen, China

, Huseyin Gulen c,∗, Yan Liu d

, Te-Feng Chen b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We propose a latent-variables approach to recover extrapolative beliefs from asset prices. We estimate a
present-value model of the price–dividend ratio of the market that embeds both return extrapolation and
cash-flow extrapolation, alongside discount rates and rational expectations of dividend growth. This approach
allows us to measure extrapolation bias without having to rely on survey data, and it inherently guarantees that
the researcher focuses on a set of beliefs that matter for price formation. We show that extrapolative beliefs
extracted from prices are highly correlated with surveys and that survey-based and price-based extrapolative
beliefs share similar predictive properties for future returns, with the former improving upon the latter.

Dataset link: Extracting Extrapolative Beliefs fr
om Market Prices: An Augmented Present-Valu
e Approach (Original data)

Keywords:
Present value
Structural estimation
Expectations
Extrapolation bias
Behavioral
Sentiment
Predictive regressions
Discount rate
Dividend growth

1.  Introduction

Using  survey  expectations  to  elicit  investor  beliefs,  recent  work
shows widespread evidence that investors extrapolate past investment
performance. In particular, Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) document
that  survey  expectations  of  future  returns  rise  on  the  back  of  good
stock market returns (i.e., return extrapolation), while Bordalo et al.
(2019), De la O and Myers (2021), and Nagel and Xu (2022) show
evidence consistent with investors’ expectations of future fundamen-
tals rising on the back of strong recent fundamentals (i.e., cash-flow
extrapolation).1

Extrapolation  of  stock-market  performance  is  likely  to  result  in
biases in expectations since, in the data, there is only a weak relation
between the past and future performance of the market (e.g., Barberis
2018).  Following  this  insight,  recent  theory  work  has  demonstrated

that extrapolation bias can have a sizable impact on stock prices and
can  help  reconcile  a  number  of  stylized  facts  about  the  stock  mar-
ket (Barberis et al., 2015; Cassella and Gulen, 2018; Choi and Mertens,
2019; Jin and Sui, 2022; Atmaz et al., 2024).

While the availability of survey data on investor beliefs has shed
light  on  the  impact  of  extrapolation  on  investor  beliefs,  the  use  of
survey data to test theories of biased beliefs has its limitations. First,
researchers need comprehensive and preferably long-running surveys,
which are lacking at present. Second, surveys only rarely allow to link
respondents’  expectations  to their  holdings or trading behavior,  and
survey coverage is limited to a selected subpopulation of the market.
This makes it difficult to draw strong inferences on the extent to which

✩
Nikolai Roussanov is the editor. We thank Zhaojing Chen, Zhi Da, Lawrence Jin, and Cam Harvey for helpful comments. We thank Marydell Forbes for
editorial assistance. Te-Feng Chen acknowledges financial support from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China
(GRF15506719). All errors are our responsibility.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: hgulen@purdue.edu (H. Gulen).

1 Earlier evidence of extrapolation both in the lab and in surveys is in De Bondt (1993). The tendency toward extrapolation may have multiple sources. It can
be due to the representativeness heuristic (Barberis et al., 1998; Bordalo et al., 2018), or the law of small numbers (Rabin, 2002). It can also be due to bounded
rationality (Hong and Stein, 1999; Fuster et al., 2012; Glaeser and Nathanson, 2017).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103986
Received 4 October 2021; Received in revised form 9 December 2024; Accepted 11 December 2024
Available online 26 December 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

extrapolation bias affects investor behavior.2 Third, several researchers
(e.g., Prescott 1977, Lamont 2003, Cochrane 2011)  have  criticized
the  use  of  surveys  in  testing  expectations  formation  on  the  basis  of
surveys being noisy and survey responses being sensitive to how survey
questions are framed.3 Fourth, concerns regarding measurement aside,
if arbitrageurs act swiftly to profit from investors’ biases, extrapolation
may be widespread and yet have little impact on asset prices. Fifth, as of
yet, return extrapolation and cash-flow extrapolation have largely been
studied separately, possibly owing to the fact that surveys often only
elicit either return or cash-flow expectations. As a result, it is unclear
what the relative contribution of cash-flow extrapolation and return
extrapolation is to equilibrium asset prices. Overall, the extent to which
extrapolation bias truly matters for asset prices is still an open empirical
question.

In  this  paper,  we  overcome  the  challenges  faced  in  prior  work
and assess the joint importance of cash-flow extrapolation and return
extrapolation for asset prices by structurally estimating an augmented
version of the present-value identity. In our present-value model, we
allow the price–dividend ratio of the market to respond to variation in
risk preferences as well as variation in rational expectations of dividend
growth, as is standard in the literature (Campbell and Shiller 1988,
Van Binsbergen and Koijen 2010). The novelty of our approach is that
we also allow for fluctuations in asset valuation to stem from return
extrapolation and cash-flow extrapolation.

Our empirical analysis builds on earlier work by Van Binsbergen
and  Koijen (2010)  (henceforth  VBK).  They  use  standard  Kalman  fil-
tering  techniques  to  structurally  estimate  a  model  of  stock  market
valuation  where  variation  in  the  market  price–dividend  ratio  is  due
to both the time variation in the discount rate and dividend growth
expectations. We conjecture that the valuation of the stock market can
also emanate from extrapolative beliefs held by some investors in the
market. We thus augment the original VBK framework by modeling the
variation in the price–dividend ratio as dependent on not only rational
investors’ discount rates and cash-flow growth expectations but also on
extrapolators’ sentiment about stocks.

Like prior research (Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014; Barberis et al.,
2015),  we  model  extrapolative  beliefs  of  future  stock  returns  as  a
weighted sum of past stock returns with decaying weights. Similarly,
we model cash-flow extrapolative expectations following the literature
as a weighted sum of past dividend-growth realizations (e.g., Nagel and
Xu 2022).

The  intuition  for  why  our  structural  model  is  able  to  simulta-
neously  identify  cash-flow  extrapolation  (henceforth 𝑊 )  and  return
extrapolation (henceforth 𝑆) in the data is simple: while both forms
of expectations are weighted sums of past market performance, they
are  ultimately  weighted  sums  of  different  quantities.  Similarly,  the
time series of rational expectations of growth (henceforth 𝑔) can be
separated from extrapolative beliefs since 𝑔 captures investors’ forward-
looking expectations of future dividend growth. Finally, the discount
rate (henceforth 𝜇) takes the role of a residual in our decomposition
since it is used to match the variation in the price–dividend ratio of
the market that cannot be accounted for by either extrapolative beliefs
or rational expectations of dividend growth.4

In  our  decomposition,  the  inclusion  of  other  traditional  drivers
of stock valuations, such as discount rates and rational expectations
of  dividend  growth  alongside  extrapolative  beliefs,  helps  to  further
strengthen the identification of extrapolative expectations in the data.
It  is  important  to  explicitly  model  rational  expectations  of  dividend
growth alongside cash-flow extrapolation because a rise in dividends
that causes cash-flow extrapolative expectation to rise is also likely to
coincide with a positive shock to future dividend-growth expectations.
Thus, explicitly controlling for rational cash-flow expectations in the
model frees the estimate of cash-flow extrapolation from the confound-
ing role of rational expectations of growth in fundamentals. Similarly,
a stock price rise that leads to an increase in extrapolative expectations
can coincide with a decline in discount rates, so that without modeling
discount rates explicitly, one has to worry about over-stating the role
of  extrapolative  expectations  for  asset  prices.  The  joint  modeling  of
𝑆 and 𝜇 helps to deal with this concern and thus helps improve the
identification of the different forces at play in shaping asset prices.

Given the novelty of our approach, we perform an extensive analysis
to validate our model. Multiple independent pieces of evidence indicate
that our model is indeed able to estimate at once the aforementioned
drivers of asset prices. First, we conduct an extensive simulation anal-
ysis aimed at investigating how well the model can identify the four
latent variables of interest for different values of the model parameters.
We find strong evidence that the model is very successful in recover-
ing the latent variables for a large set of parameters. Second, while
the extrapolative beliefs in our model are consistent with theoretical
models  of  extrapolation,  we  acknowledge  that  our  model  estimates
these  time  series  with  the  aim  of  matching  asset  prices  rather  than
beliefs. This raises the question of whether our price-based extrapola-
tion metrics indeed match the dynamics of extrapolative beliefs from
survey  data.  To  answer  this  question,  we  first  compare  raw  survey
expectations of returns (cash-flows) with our structural estimates and
find an encouraging positive correlation of 25% (50%). We then note
that survey expectations need not capture just extrapolative beliefs.5
Therefore,  we  perform  a  more  informative  comparison  between  the
extrapolative  component  of  surveys  and  our  estimates.  Our  return-
extrapolation measure has a 70% correlation with return-extrapolative
beliefs extracted from surveys, whereas it has a correlation that is close
to zero with surveys of cash-flow growth expectations. Similarly, our
cash-flow extrapolation time series shares a correlation of 50% with
cash-flow extrapolation from surveys and only a small correlation of
10% or less with return-extrapolation data from surveys.6 The fact that
the model can recover beliefs in a way that is consistent with survey
data is important in that it lends credence to our approach. Moreover,
since  our  measures  are  extracted  from  asset  prices,  this  result  also
provides support for behavioral theories looking to connect fluctuations
in asset prices to extrapolative beliefs.

In the last part of the paper, we use our estimated time series of
investor  beliefs  about  returns  and  cash  flows  to  conduct  aggregate
return predictability tests. Since our econometric approach does not
aim, like recent work involving machine learning techniques, to build
new  and  robust  predictors  of  stock  returns,  the  goal  of  this  part  of
the analysis is not to break new ground in the aggregate time-series

2 Two notable exceptions are Giglio et al. (2021), and Liu et al. (2022).
3 Greenwood  and  Shleifer (2014)  provide  evidence  that  alleviates  these
concerns.  First,  they  show  that  return  expectations  are  highly  correlated
across various surveys, suggesting that survey expectations contain valuable
information and not just noise. Second, subsequent mutual fund flows are in
the  same  direction  as  survey  expectations,  supporting  the  idea  that  survey
responses reflect true investor expectations.

4 Of course, the fact that the discount-rate component of our model is a
residual implies that it could capture drivers of beliefs that are unrelated to
risk preferences. In our extension of our main model, presented in the Internet
Appendix, we tackle this issue by explicitly allowing the discount-rate process
to depend on some observable proxy for discount rates.

5 For instance, evidence in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) suggests that
extrapolative beliefs explain about 30% of variation in survey expectations of
returns.

6 This  positive  correlation  is  somewhat  to  be  expected:  after  all,  both
the survey-based extrapolation and the structural estimates are sums of past
returns or cash-flow growth realizations. However, the correlation need not
be high if the structural decay parameter of extrapolative expectations differs
from  the  decay  parameter  in  extrapolative  beliefs  from  surveys.  Thus,  the
finding  of  a  high  correlation  between  structural  measures  of  extrapolative
expectations and survey-based measures amounts to stating that the structural
model recovers a decay parameter that is in line with the one measured using
survey data.

2 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

predictability literature. Rather, the primary purpose of the predictabil-
ity  tests  we  conduct  is  to  compare  the  predictive  performance  of
surveys-based  extrapolation  metrics  with  our  structurally  estimated
beliefs time series. If our structural approach is successful at measuring
extrapolative beliefs rather than other drivers of asset prices, we expect
surveys  and  structurally  estimated  beliefs  metrics  to  exhibit  similar
predictive  abilities.  Indeed,  we  find  similar  predictive  properties  for
survey-based  extrapolation  and  our  extrapolation  metrics,  both  in-
sample and out-of-sample. As a matter of fact, in the in-sample tests,
price-based extrapolative beliefs have a stronger predictive power than
survey-based  metrics  based  on  the  size  of  the  predictive  coefficient,
the  statistical  significance  of  the  predictability  coefficients,  and  the
𝑅2 of the predictive regressions. The improved predictability that is
observed using price-based extrapolative beliefs is particularly evident
at short and intermediate horizons, while survey-based metrics exhibit
somewhat better predictive power at a longer horizon of three years,
making the overall predictive ability of two sets of metrics for extrap-
olation comparable. Out-of-sample tests, either based on Campbell and
Thompson (2008) out-of-sample 𝑅2 or Clark and West (2007) statistic,
deliver similar insights.

Our predictive tests also serve a secondary purpose: both theories
of cash-flow extrapolation and return extrapolation predict that when
extrapolative expectations rise, future returns will be lower. One way
of assessing whether return or cash-flow extrapolation matters for asset
prices is to compare the ability of these two belief systems to predict
future  stock  returns.  In  principle,  this  type  of  comparison  could  be
done using surveys.7 However, different surveys collect return expecta-
tions and cash-flow expectations, often using different types of survey
participants, different sample sizes, and different sample periods. All
these differences lead to the possibility that differences in the predictive
ability  of  survey-based  return-  and  cash-flow  extrapolation  are  due
to differences in the quality of the data and could not appropriately
portray  the  role  of  the  two  forms  of  extrapolation  for  asset  prices.
Our empirical approach allows us to circumvent these issues in that
we  estimate  both  return  extrapolation  and  cash-flow  extrapolation
jointly as part of a unified econometric approach. When comparing the
predictive ability of cash-flow extrapolation and return extrapolation
using our metrics, we find that both share a similar ability to predict
future returns, and each has a marginal predictive power for future
returns vis-a-vis the other.

All in all, our empirical evidence points to a great degree of simi-
larity between existing survey-based extrapolation metrics and our new
price-based extrapolation time series. As such, this evidence lends cred-
ibility to our new approach, and it reinforces the notion that surveys
elicit beliefs that matter for asset prices. While our results indicate the
survey-based approach and our structural approach provide answers
that are in line with each other, we argue that a cautious interpretation
of our results is in order. Simply put, survey data offers direct insights
into belief formation, whereas recovering beliefs from market prices
as we do constitutes an indirect approach. Our approach to recovering
extrapolation asks what is the combination of past return and cash-flow
realizations that best matches variation in asset prices rather than what
is the combination of such realizations that drives beliefs. Therefore, we
argue that both surveys and asset prices should be used jointly in future
work looking to extend the framework presented in this paper.

Our paper contributes to two strands of literature. Our first con-
tribution  is  methodological,  as  we  show  how  to  extend  a  standard
present-value model of asset prices to incorporate behavioral factors. In
this regard, we contribute to a growing literature that uses structural es-
timation in asset pricing to extract latent quantities of interest (e.g., Van
Binsbergen and Koijen 2010, Koijen and Yogo 2019, Gabaix and Koijen
2020).  Two  features  mark  our  new  present-value  framework.  First,
we  propose  a  new  guess-and-verify  approach  to  solving  for  market

7 See McCarthy and Hillenbrand (2021) for an example.

equilibrium that complements the VBK solution and makes the inclu-
sion  of  additional  state  dynamics  straightforward  in  a  present-value
relation. Second, our econometric specification allows us to assess the
differential impacts of extrapolators versus rational traders, capturing
the  main  insight  in  theoretical  behavioral  models.  We  believe  our
framework can be extended to test other theories of belief formation
and can potentially spur a new stream of academic research.

Our  second  contribution  is  to  a  longstanding  debate  on  the  role
of irrational beliefs for asset prices. In traditional models of financial
markets, asset prices reflect only rational expectations and irrational
investors are irrelevant for prices due to the presence of deep-pocketed
arbitrageurs.8 In contrast to this view, behavioral finance posits that
investors’  biased  beliefs  do  impact  asset  prices  (e.g., Shleifer 2000,
Barberis  and  Thaler 2005, Barberis 2018, Bordalo  et  al. 2024).  The
recent  steps  taken  by  empirical  research  in  the  field  to  directly  in-
vestigate  the  role  of  biases  for  price  formation  involve  survey  data,
but researchers worry about the quality of the data and are limited
by the sparse nature of surveys. We avoid these concerns and offer a
new structural approach to extracting information on biases in beliefs
directly from asset prices. Our approach inherently captures biases to
the extent that they matter in equilibrium.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents
our structural framework and estimates the model using US data. In
Section 3, we provide evidence to help validate our approach. Section 4
presents possible model extensions. Section 5 concludes.

2.  A model of market valuation with extrapolative investors

2.1.  The rational benchmark: Van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)

We first describe the model in Van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)
(henceforth  VBK),  which  we  treat  as  the  rational  benchmark  that
) denote the log
motivates our framework. Let 𝑟𝑡+1 =  log(

𝑃𝑡+1 + 𝐷𝑡+1
𝑃𝑡

return of the market, 𝑝𝑑𝑡+1 = log(

𝑃𝑡+1
𝐷𝑡+1

) denote the log price–dividend

𝐷𝑡+1
𝐷𝑡

) denote the log dividend
≡ 𝐸𝑡(𝑟𝑡+1)) and the
≡ 𝐸𝑡(𝛥𝑑𝑡+1)) as latent variables that

ratio (hereafter pd ratio), and 𝛥𝑑𝑡+1 = log(
growth rate. VBK model the expected return (𝜇𝑡
expected dividend growth rate (𝑔𝑡
follow separate AR(1) processes:
𝜇𝑡+1 = 𝜇0 + 𝜌𝜇(𝜇𝑡 − 𝜇0) + 𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1,
𝑔𝑡+1 = 𝑔0 + 𝜌𝑔(𝑔𝑡 − 𝑔0) + 𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1,
(2)
where 𝜇0 (𝑔0), 𝜌𝜇 (𝜌𝑔), and 𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1 (𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1) are the unconditional mean,
the persistence parameter, and the innovation to the expected return
(the expected dividend growth) process, respectively.

(1)

Using the Campbell and Shiller (1988) approximation, the log return

can be linearized as:

𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝜅 + 𝜌𝑝𝑑𝑡+1 − 𝑝𝑑𝑡 + 𝛥𝑑𝑡+1,
where 𝜌 = exp(𝑝𝑑)
, 𝜅 =  log(1 + exp(𝑝𝑑)) − 𝜌𝑝𝑑,  and 𝑝𝑑 denotes
1+exp(𝑝𝑑)
the unconditional mean of the log price–dividend ratio. Iterating the
Campbell–Shiller approximation over the log price–dividend ratio and
taking conditional expectation at time 𝑡, it follows that:

(3)

∞
∑

𝑝𝑑𝑡 = 𝐸𝑡[

𝑗=0

𝜌𝑗 (𝜅 + 𝛥𝑑𝑡+1+𝑗 − 𝑟𝑡+1+𝑗 )],

= 𝐴 + 𝐵𝑔(𝑔𝑡 − 𝑔0) − 𝐵𝜇(𝜇𝑡 − 𝜇0),

(4)

(5)

1−𝜌

1−𝜌𝜌𝜇

where 𝐴 = 𝜅+𝑔0−𝜇0
. As such, the log price–
dividend ratio is linear in the two state variables (i.e., 𝜇𝑡 and 𝑔𝑡), and
loads positively on 𝑔𝑡 and negatively on 𝜇𝑡.

, and 𝐵𝑔 = 1

, 𝐵𝜇 = 1

Eq. (5) is the fundamental equation in VBK that links the observ-
able  price–dividend  ratio  to  the  two  latent  state  variables.  It  states
that the variation in the price–dividend ratio is completely driven by

1−𝜌𝜌𝑔

8 Examples of work on the rational-expectations paradigm in asset pricing
are Sharpe (1964), Fama (1970), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Bansal
and Yaron (2004).

3 

S. Cassella et al.

the  variation in the  discount rate and the variation  in the  expected
dividend growth rate (and possibly their covariance). Note that there
is a one-to-one mapping between (𝐵1, 𝐵2) and (𝜌𝜇, 𝜌𝑔). As a result, an
alternative approach to derive the VBK representation is to first specify
the log price–dividend ratio as a linear function of the two latent state
variables and then derive the dynamics of expected returns through
the Campbell–Shiller decomposition. In the next section, we take this
alternative approach to derive the market equilibrium in the presence
of extrapolators.

2.2.  A present-value model with extrapolative beliefs

In this section, we extend the present-value model described in the
previous section by incorporating extrapolative beliefs, which are stud-
ied in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), Barberis et al. (2015), Cassella
and Gulen (2018), and Nagel and Xu (2022). Our primary focus on
return extrapolation as an irrational belief formation process is war-
ranted by the evidence of its pervasiveness in the laboratory and in
the  field  (e.g., De  Bondt  and  Thaler 1985, De  Bondt 1993, Vissing-
Jorgensen 2003, Nagel 2012, Dominitz  and  Manski 2011, Amromin
and Sharpe 2014, Greenwood and Shleifer 2014, Cassella and Gulen
2018, Malmendier et al. 2020). More recent literature also points to
the extrapolation of past cash flows as a source of incorrect expectations
(e.g., Bordalo et al. 2019, De la O and Myers 2021, Nagel and Xu 2022).
Following  this  literature,  we  present  a  model  that  allows  for  both
cash flow extrapolation and return extrapolation, as well as rational
dividend growth expectations and time-varying risk preferences, i.e., a
time-varying discount rate.

2.2.1.  Model assumptions

To simplify our presentation, we deamean all variables and present
our model economy in terms of demeaned quantities (denoted with a
hat). There are some ‘‘rational traders’’ in the economy who trade a
risky asset whose supply is fixed as in the rational benchmark of Van
Binsbergen  and  Koijen (2010).  Following Barberis  et  al. (2015),  we
assume that there are ‘‘return extrapolators’’ in the economy who form
beliefs of future market returns based on past stock market returns.
Further, following Nagel and Xu (2022), we assume that there are also
‘‘cash flow extrapolators’’ in the economy who form beliefs of future
fundamentals based on past fundamentals.9

We first specify the dynamics of the beliefs of return extrapolators.
Following prior work, we model the (demeaned) time-series of extrapo-
lators’ return expectation ( ̂𝑆𝑡) as follows (e.g., Greenwood and Shleifer,
2014; Barberis et al., 2015):
̂𝑆𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛽𝑆 ) ̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽𝑆 ̂𝑟𝑡+1,

(6)

where 𝛽𝑆 is the weighting parameter. We can rewrite

∑∞

̂𝑆𝑡 = 𝛽𝑆

𝑗=0(1 − 𝛽𝑆 )𝑗̂𝑟𝑡−𝑗 , where ̂𝑆𝑡 is a weighted average of all past
returns. A higher 𝛽𝑆 indicates more weight is placed on more recent
returns.

We then specify the dynamics of the beliefs of cash-flow extrap-
olators,  and  we  model  the  (demeaned)  time-series  of  extrapolators’
cash-flow expectation ( ̂𝑤𝑡) as follows (e.g., Nagel and Xu 2022):
̂𝑤𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛽𝑤) ̂𝑤𝑡 + 𝛽𝑤

̂𝛥𝑑𝑡+1

(7)

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

𝛽𝑤 implies more weights on the distant realizations of past dividend
growth.10

Rational traders hold time-varying preferences for risk. Similar to
the specification in (1) of VBK, we model the (demeaned) variation in
rational investors’ required compensation for risk via an autoregressive
process that tracks time-varying discount rates:

̂𝜇𝑡+1 = 𝜌𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1,
where 𝜌𝜇 is  the  persistence  parameter.
̂𝜇𝑡 can  be  interpreted  as  the
expected market return in the absence of extrapolators. However, this
quantity will differ from actual expected returns (i.e., 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1)) when
extrapolators are present in the market. Hereafter, to better distinguish
̂𝜇𝑡 from 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1), we refer to ̂𝜇𝑡 as the discount rate and 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1) as the
(overall) expected return for the market.

(8)

Another way to distinguish ̂𝜇𝑡 from the overall expected return of
the market is through a frequency decomposition. Because ̂𝜇𝑡 is highly
persistent and can be thought of as the required rate of return for long-
term buy-and-hold investors, it is the primary driver of returns in the
long run (e.g., over five years). In contrast, the one-year-ahead overall
expected market return 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1) is relatively short-run and, therefore,
will be affected (or ‘‘contaminated’’) by extrapolators’ sentiment. Our
formulation succinctly captures this distinction in the investment hori-
zon by modeling the discount rate as a self-contained process. While
alternative formulations are possible (e.g., directly modeling 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1)
as the ‘‘discount rate’’), they unnecessarily complicate the analysis as
well as the intuition because, due to the dependence of extrapolation on
returns, alternative formulations imply the reliance of discount rates on
extrapolators’ sentiment. To maintain model parsimony and ease model
interpretation, we focus on our current formulation.

Next, the (demeaned) expected dividend growth rate ( ̂𝑔𝑡) is assumed

to follow an AR(1) process:

̂𝑔𝑡+1 = 𝜌𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1,
where the model parameter 𝜌𝑔 and the shock 𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1 carry the same in-
terpretations as those in (2) of VBK. The (demeaned) realized dividend
growth rate is assumed to follow:
̂𝛥𝑑𝑡+1 = ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1.

(10)

(9)

̂𝑆𝑡+1,

̂𝑤𝑡+1,

Note  that  the  four  state  variables

̂𝑔𝑡+1,  and ̂𝜇𝑡+1 are
assumed to only depend on their lagged values. One can easily extend
our  model  by  assuming  a  general  vector-autoregression  (i.e.,  VAR),
where  state  variables  may  load  on  other  lagged  state  variables.  We
focus on our specification to maintain model parsimony (given we have
limited time series data to estimate our model) and to achieve model
identification. Also note that we model the three shocks in the model
(i.e., 𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1, 𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1,  and 𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1)  as  homoscedastic  normal  shocks  that
are cross-sectionally independent. We do not allow shock correlations,
again to maintain model parsimony. The standard deviations for these
shocks are given by 𝜎𝜇, 𝜎𝑔, and 𝜎𝑑 , respectively.

Both types of extrapolators trade in the direction of their beliefs
so  that  when  past  aggregate  returns  (cash-flow  growth)  are  higher,
return-extrapolators  (cash-flow  extrapolators)  become  optimistic  and
increase their demand for stocks. Faced with extrapolators’ irrational
demand for stocks and with prices that are higher than justified by
fundamentals, rational traders could, in principle, counter the mispric-
ing generated by extrapolators by shorting the overpriced asset, thus
leading  prices  to  immediately  revert  to  the  value  that  is  warranted
by fundamentals. However, rational traders who understand the law

where 𝛽𝑤 is the weighting parameter. Similarly to what we point out for
𝑗=0(1 − 𝛽𝑤)𝑗 ̂𝛥𝑑𝑡−𝑗 , where
return extrapolation, one can write ̂𝑤𝑡 = 𝛽𝑤
̂𝑤𝑡 is a weighted average of all past dividend growth rates. A lower

∑∞

9 For  simplicity,  we  are  modeling  cash  flow  extrapolators  and  return

extrapolators as two separate sets of investors.

10 Cassella  and  Gulen (2018)  allow  time-varying  weights  (i.e., 𝛽𝑆 )  and
extract them from survey expectations. We focus on time-invariant weights to
preserve the analytical tractability of our present-value model (in particular,
the linear dependence of equilibrium quantities on the state variables). Such
tractability aids with an intuitive interpretation of our model, as well as a
standard (linear) Kalman-Filtering approach to estimate our model.

4 

S. Cassella et al.

of  motion  of  extrapolative  beliefs  anticipate  that  bullish  extrapola-
tive expectations are likely to persist in the near future. As a result,
rational  market  participants  only  partially  counter  the  overpricing
caused by either type of extrapolators. In equilibrium, the presence of
over-optimistic extrapolators generates over-pricing.11

In Barberis et al. (2015), an increase in return extrapolators’ senti-
ment S generates variation in the price–dividend ratio of the market.
Similarly, Nagel and Xu (2022) propose that cash-flow extrapolators’
optimism about stocks can lead to fluctuations in the valuation of the
market.  We  combine  this  behavioral  view  about  the  price–dividend
ratio of the market with the standard present-value decomposition and
postulate the following additive linear structure of the (demeaned) pd
ratio as:
̂𝑝𝑑𝑡 = −𝐵𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝐵𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝐵𝑆
where the loading coefficients are either constrained or to be estimated,
as we will specify later. All coefficients 𝐵𝜇, 𝐵𝑔, 𝐵𝑆 , and 𝐵𝑤 will be
shown  to  be  positive.  As  such, −𝐵𝜇 captures  the  negative  contem-
poraneous correlation between the discount rate ̂𝜇𝑡 and the pd ratio
̂𝑝𝑑𝑡.12

̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝐵𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡,

(11)

Eq. (11) is  our  main  econometric  specification  for  the  impact  of
extrapolators’ sentiment on asset prices. The sign and the magnitude of
such impact are captured by the coefficients 𝐵𝑆 and 𝐵𝑤, which will be
estimated empirically. These coefficients determine the direction and
the  extent  to  which  extrapolative  beliefs  affect  the  valuation  of  the
stock market. When both 𝐵𝑆 and 𝐵𝑤 are zero, our decomposition of the
pd ratio coincides with the one in VBK, where asset prices are purely
driven by discount rates and expectations of dividend growth, and ex-
trapolation has no impact on equilibrium prices. Conversely, the finding
that 𝐵𝑆 and 𝐵𝑤 are different from zero and positive, as the estimation
results presented later indicate, makes (11) consistent with theories of
asset prices with return and cashflow extrapolation (e.g., Barberis et al.
2015, Nagel and Xu 2022). In these theories, extrapolators’ sentiment
leads to a deviation of stock market valuation from the level that is
warranted by fundamentals. As the earlier Eq. (6) shows, this deviation
is  fueled  by  past  stock  returns  or  past  dividend-growth  realizations.
High recent stock market performance causes extrapolators’ sentiment
to become excessively optimistic and stock prices to become too high
relative to a rational benchmark. Similarly, a streak of negative news
about the market leads to pessimism among extrapolators, which in
turn pushes prices too low relative to what would be observed in the
absence of extrapolators. Importantly, our formulation of extrapolative
sentiment  in (6) indicates  that  sentiment  displays  an  autoregressive
behavior, such that optimistic (pessimistic) extrapolative expectations
today can be predicted to correct in the future, leading to implications
for time-series predictability that are the subject of empirical tests later
in the paper.

Our  formulation  for  the pd ratio  in (11) posits  a  linear  relation
between  the  price–dividend  ratio  and  extrapolators’  sentiment.  This
relation  suggests  that  one  could  study  the  impact  of  extrapolators’
sentiment on prices by simply regressing the price–dividend ratio on
a weighted sum of past returns. However, we argue that this procedure
is  not  appropriate  and  can  generate  biased  estimates  of  the  impact
of  extrapolation  on  asset  prices.  The  reason  is  that  such  a  simple
procedure would suffer from an omitted variable problem because the

11 It is worth noting that extrapolators might be thinking about asset prices
via the present-value relation. De la O and Myers (2021) provide evidence
consistent with this view. However, for simplicity, we abstract from this aspect
and model return extrapolation and cash flow extrapolation separately.
12 One  interpretation  of  the  equation  above  is  that  the  loadings  of  the
price–dividend ratio on different components reflect the probability masses
of different types of investors in the market place. Note, however, that this
interpretation is based on intuitive grounds and that the mapping between
our specification of the price–dividend ratio and the behavior of the pd ratio
in theoretical models with extrapolators is meant to be qualitative.

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

other latent variables, such as the discount rate and expected dividend
growth, would be absent from the regression. For this reason, we focus
on the structural approach in our paper.

2.2.2.  Solving the model economy

We take a different approach from VBK to derive the market equilib-
rium. First, given the postulated solution for the pd ratio, we derive the
implied return dynamics (as perceived by rational traders) through the
Campbell–Shiller approximation. Next, we use the implied return dy-
namics to succinctly represent our model economy within a state-space
framework. Lastly, we use the state-space representation to confirm our
solution for the pd ratio.

Using Campbell–Shiller decomposition (3), demeaned realized re-
turn equals ̂𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝜌̂𝑝𝑑𝑡+1 − ̂𝑝𝑑𝑡 + ̂𝛥𝑑𝑡+1. By substituting in the postulated
solution for the pd ratio and the expression for ̂𝛥𝑑𝑡+1 (i.e., (10)), we
have:

− [−𝐵𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝐵𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝐵𝑆

̂𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝜌[−𝐵𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡+1 + 𝐵𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡+1 + 𝐵𝑆

̂𝑆𝑡+1 + 𝐵𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡+1]
̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝐵𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡] + ̂𝛥𝑑𝑡+1.
Note  that  the  left-hand  side  return  at 𝑡 + 1 is  not  exogenously
̂𝑆𝑡+1
determined by the right-hand side variables. The reason is that
itself,  being  extrapolators’  sentiment  at  the  end  of  the  time  period,
depends on market return over this period through Eq. (6). In other
words, return extrapolators observe the most recent market return and
update  their  extrapolative  beliefs  accordingly.  Solving ̂𝑟𝑡+1 from  the
above equation, we can express ̂𝑟𝑡+1 in terms of time 𝑡 state variables
and innovations as:
̂𝑟𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[𝐵𝜇(1 − 𝜌𝜌𝜇)]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝜆𝜇

̂𝜇𝑡

+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[1 + 𝜌𝐵𝑤𝛽𝑤 − 𝐵𝑔(1 − 𝜌𝜌𝑔)]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝜆𝑔

̂𝑔𝑡

+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[−𝐵𝑆 (1 − 𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆 )]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝜆𝑠
+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[−𝐵𝑤(1 − 𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑤)]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝜆𝑤

̂𝑆𝑡

̂𝑤𝑡

+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[(1 + 𝜌𝐵𝑤𝛽𝑤)𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1 + 𝜌𝐵𝑔𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1 − 𝜌𝐵𝜇𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝜀𝑟,𝑡+1

, (12)

which implies that ̂𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1) + 𝜀𝑟,𝑡+1, where
𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1) = 𝜆𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜆𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝜆𝑆

̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝜆𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡.

(13)

We interpret (13) by comparing it to VBK. In VBK, the (demeaned)
expected market return is simply ̂𝜇𝑡. In our model, expected market
returns load on ̂𝜇𝑡 with a coefficient of (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1, in addition to
𝐵𝜇(1 − 𝜌𝜌𝜇), which is later set to 1 to achieve model identification.
This  coefficient  is  larger  than  one  so  as  to  reflect  the  amplification
of discount rate shocks caused by the presence of extrapolators in the
market.

1
1−𝜌𝜌𝑔

1
1−𝜌𝜌𝜇

, and 𝐵𝑔 =

The  intuition  is  as  follows.  In  a  market  with  no  extrapolators,
𝐵𝑆 =  0 and 𝐵𝑤 =  0,  so  that  a  one-unit  increase  in  discount  rates
̂𝜇𝑡 raises the expected market return by the same unit. This implies,
. So, in our estimation, we
like in VBK, 𝐵𝜇 =
fix 𝐵𝜇 and 𝐵𝑔 accordingly.  The  presence  of  return  extrapolators  in
the market exacerbates market movements in response to changes in
discount rates. This is because an increase (decline) in discount rates
today lowers (increases) contemporaneous prices and returns, leading
to pessimistic (optimistic) extrapolative expectations and, hence, even
lower  (higher)  prices  and  returns  today.  Therefore,  the  equilibrium
outcome  is  a (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1-unit  (which  is  larger  than  1)  change  in
expected market return following a unit change in discount rates. Note
the same amplification mechanism applies to the other state variables
(i.e., ̂𝑔𝑡,

̂𝑆𝑡, and ̂𝑤𝑡).

S. Cassella et al.

The  coefficient 𝜆𝑆 in  Eq.  (12) captures  the  link  between  return
extrapolators’ sentiment and future returns. Besides the amplification
effect (i.e., (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1) discussed above, two other offsetting effects
contribute to 𝜆𝑆 . The first effect is quantified by −𝐵𝑆 , later estimated
to be negative, and captures the fact that when current extrapolators’
beliefs are high, they push up current prices, implying a lower return in
the future. The second effect is quantified by 𝐵𝑆 𝜌(1 −𝛽𝑆 ), later estimated
to be positive, and captures the fact that due to extrapolators’ persistent
beliefs, a higher current bias raises the next period bias by a factor
of (1 − 𝛽𝑆 ),  thereby  increasing  the  next  period pd ratio  by  a  factor
of 𝐵𝑆 (1 − 𝛽𝑆 ). Through the Campbell–Shiller decomposition (3), the
corresponding increase in expected return is 𝐵𝑆 𝜌(1 − 𝛽𝑆 ). The negative
current effect and the positive future effect negate each other, leading
to a negative effect overall.

The coefficient 𝜆𝑤 in Eq. (12) captures the link between cash-flow
extrapolators’  sentiment  and  future  returns.  On  the  one  hand,  high
cash-flow  extrapolation  raises  prices  today,  leading  to  lower  returns
in the future as cash-flow extrapolation reverts to the mean. On the
other  hand,  high  cash  flow  extrapolation  today  leads  prices  to  stay
high in the future through the persistence of this latent process. The
overall  relationship  between 𝑤 and  future  returns  is  negative.  The
coefficient 𝜆𝑔 is  positive  in  our  model  due  to  the  presence  of  cash-
flow extrapolators: as expectations of growth in fundamentals rise, we
expect cash-flow extrapolation to rise in the future, leading to a positive
relation between 𝑔 and future returns.

Since dividend growth in our model is exogenous, the dynamics of
cash-flow extrapolation are already fully described by Eq. (7). Instead,
return  extrapolation  and  asset  prices  are  contemporaneously  deter-
mined. Thus, to obtain the dynamics of return extrapolation given (12),
we substitute out market returns in (6) and write down the dynamics
of return extrapolators’ sentiment in terms of lagged state variables and
innovations:
̂𝑆𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛽𝑆 ) ̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽𝑆 [𝜆𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜆𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝜆𝑆

̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝜆𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡] + 𝛽𝑆 𝜀𝑟,𝑡+1

= (1 − 𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜆𝑆 )) ̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽𝑆 [𝜆𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜆𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝜆𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡]

+ 𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[(1 + 𝜌𝐵𝑤𝛽𝑤)𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1 + 𝜌𝐵𝑔𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1 − 𝜌𝐵𝜇𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1].(14)
Eq. (14) makes  two  things  clear  about  the  dynamics  of  return-
extrapolative beliefs. First, although beliefs themselves appear to have
an autocorrelation coefficient of (1 − 𝛽𝑆 ) from Eq. (6), their endogenous
dependence on returns leads to a de facto lower level of persistence as
given by (1 − 𝛽𝑆 + 𝛽𝑆 𝜆𝑆 ).13 Second, the reliance of extrapolative beliefs
on contemporaneous returns also implies that all the innovations that
affect returns also drive the innovations in extrapolative beliefs, as seen
from the shock decomposition in Eq. (14).

To represent our model economy in a state-space framework, we
collect the state variables into 𝑋𝑡 = [ ̂𝜇𝑡, ̂𝑔𝑡, ̂𝑆𝑡, ̂𝑤𝑡]′. Based on (8), (9),
and (14), the evolution of 𝑋𝑡 is given by:
𝑋𝑡+1 = 𝛤 𝑋𝑡 + 𝛷𝑋 𝜀𝑋 ,𝑡+1,
where 𝛤 and 𝛷𝑋 are given by
0 
0 
0 
𝜌𝑔
1 − 𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜆𝑆 )
𝛽𝑆 𝜆𝑔
0 
𝛽𝑤

𝜌𝜇
0
𝛽𝑆 𝜆𝜇
0

(15)

(16)

𝛤 =

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝛷𝑋 =

0 
⎡
⎢
0 
⎢
𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[1 + 𝜌𝐵𝑤𝛽𝑤
⎢
⎢
𝛽𝑤
⎣

,

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

0
0
𝛽𝑆 𝜆𝑤
1 − 𝛽𝑤
0 
⎤
⎥
1 
⎥
𝜌𝐵𝑔 −𝜌𝐵𝜇]
⎥
0 
⎥
⎦

1
0

0

,

and the shock vector 𝜀𝑋 ,𝑡+1 is given by: 𝜀𝑋 ,𝑡+1 = [𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1, 𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1, 𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1]′.
The two observation equations are given by (10) and (11). Note that
the return Eq. (12) does not constitute a separate observation equation

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

because it can be derived under the above two observation equations
and the state dynamics.

As  the  last  step  for  the  presentation  of  our  model  economy,  we
confirm the postulated solution for the pd ratio through the Campbell–
Shiller decomposition. In particular, we ask: given the return dynamics
specified  in (12) and  the  evolution  of  the  state  variables  in (15),
and assuming rational expectations (from the perspective of rational
traders), can we arrive at (11)?

We have:
∞
∑

̂𝑝𝑑𝑡 =

𝜌𝑗 𝐸𝑡( ̂𝛥𝑑𝑡+1+𝑗 − ̂𝑟𝑡+1+𝑗 ),

𝑗=0
∞
∑

𝑗=0

=

𝜌𝑗 [−𝜆𝜇, 1 − 𝜆𝑔, −𝜆𝑆 , −𝜆𝑤]𝐸𝑡(𝑋𝑡+𝑗 ),

= [−𝜆𝜇, 1 − 𝜆𝑔, −𝜆𝑆 , −𝜆𝑤]

∞
∑

𝑗=0

𝜌𝑗 𝛤 𝑗 𝑋𝑡,

= [−𝜆𝜇, 1 − 𝜆𝑔, −𝜆𝑆 , −𝜆𝑤](𝐼4 − 𝜌𝛤 )−1𝑋𝑡,
= −𝐵𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝐵𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝐵𝑆

̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝐵𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡,

(17)

(18)

(19)

where 𝐼4 is  a  four-by-four  identity  matrix.  In  the  above  derivation,
Eq. (17) follows the dynamics for dividend growth (i.e., (9)) and market
return (i.e., (12)). Eq. (18) follows the VAR representation for the state
vector 𝑋𝑡. Finally, we detail the derivation of Eq. (19) in the Appendix,
Appendix A.

The notion of rational expectations necessitates some further clarifi-
cation. In our model, risk-averse rational traders have forward-looking
beliefs about future market returns. However, their beliefs about the fu-
ture account for the (temporary) impact of extrapolators. In particular,
by observing ̂𝑆𝑡 and ̂𝑤𝑡 and considering their impacts on the current
pd ratio  through (11),  rational  investors  have  rational  expectations
for the next period return through (12). This means they understand
̂𝑆𝑡+1 and ̂𝑤𝑡+1) on
the impact of the next period’s extrapolation (i.e.,
the next period’s price level through (11) (applied to 𝑡 + 1), thereby
endogeneously  solving  the  return  dynamics  as  given  by (12).  They
continue in this fashion to solve future returns, accounting for the fact
̂𝑆𝑡+𝑗 and ̂𝑤𝑡+𝑗 (𝑗 ≥ 2) will have the same impact
that future values of
on future returns as in (12). Finally, by iterating (6) and (12), rational
investors form forecasts of future returns and extrapolators’ sentiment,
leading to a current pd ratio given by (19) (also (11)).

2.2.3.  An alternative state-space representation

We derive an alternative state-space representation to facilitate the
estimation  of  our  model.  Since  the pd ratio  is  perfectly  spanned  by
the state variables, we substitute out one of the state variables (which
we  choose  to  be ̂𝜇𝑡)  in (11) with pd ratio  and  derive  a  state-space
representation with only three states. In particular, the new observation
equation for pd ratio is:
̂𝑝𝑑𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1(𝜌𝜇 − 𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐿𝑝𝑑

̂𝑝𝑑𝑡

+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1(𝐵𝑔(𝜌𝑔 − 𝜌𝜇) + 𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 + 𝐵𝑤𝛽𝑤)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐿𝑔

̂𝑔𝑡

+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1(𝐵𝑆 (1 − 𝜌𝜇 − 𝛽𝑆 ))
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐿𝑆
+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1(𝐵𝑤(1 − 𝜌𝜇 − 𝛽𝑤))
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐿𝑤

̂𝑆𝑡

̂𝑤𝑡

+ (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1[(𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 + 𝐵𝑤𝛽𝑤)𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1 + 𝐵𝑔𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1 − 𝐵𝜇𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1]

= 𝐿𝑝𝑑

̂𝑝𝑑𝑡 + 𝐿𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝐿𝑆

̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝐿𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡 + 𝛷′

𝑝𝑑 𝜀𝑋 ,𝑡+1,

13 The  lower  persistence  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  as  our  estimates  later
indicate, the parameter 𝜆𝑆 is negative in the data.

where  the  loadings  on  shocks  are  collected  into  the  vector 𝛷𝑝𝑑 as
defined by:

6 

S. Cassella et al.

𝛷𝑝𝑑

≡

𝐿𝜀,𝑑
⎡
𝐿𝜀,𝑔
⎢
⎢
𝐿𝜀,𝜇
⎣

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

= (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1

𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 + 𝐵𝑤𝛽𝑤
𝐵𝑔
−𝐵𝜇

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

.

Given this alternative specification, we substitute out market returns
in (6) using the Campbell–Shiller return approximation identity (3) and
rewrite the dynamics of extrapolators’ sentiment in (14) in terms of the
pd ratio and other lagged state variables:
̂𝑆𝑡+1 = −𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜌𝐿𝑝𝑑 )̂𝑝𝑑𝑡 + 𝛽𝑆 (1 + 𝜌𝐿𝑔) ̂𝑔𝑡 + (1 − 𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜌𝐿𝑆 )) ̂𝑆𝑡

+ 𝜌𝛽𝑆 𝐿𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡 + 𝛽𝑆 (1 + 𝜌𝐿𝜀,𝑑 )𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆 𝐿𝜀,𝑔𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆 𝐿𝜀,𝜇𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1.
Now let the expanded state vector be 𝐹𝑡 = [ ̂𝑔𝑡−1, ̂𝑆𝑡−1, ̂𝑤𝑡−1, 𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡, 𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡,
𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡]′ and let the observation vector be 𝑌𝑡 = [ ̂𝛥𝑑𝑡, ̂𝑝𝑑𝑡]′ and the control
variable  be 𝑈𝑡 = ̂𝑝𝑑𝑡−1.  The  dynamics  of  the  state  vector  can  be
described as:

𝐹𝑡+1 = 𝛤𝐹 𝐹𝑡 + 𝛤𝑈 𝑈𝑡+1 + 𝛷𝐹 𝜀𝑋 ,𝑡+1,

(20)

where

𝛤𝐹 =

𝛤𝐹 ,𝑋 =

𝛤𝐹 ,𝜀 =

𝛤𝑈 ,𝑋 =

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

[𝛤𝐹 ,𝑋
03×3

]

𝛤𝐹 ,𝜀
03×3

, 𝛤𝑈 =

𝜌𝑔

𝛽𝑆 (1 + 𝜌𝐿𝑔)  1 − 𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜌𝐿𝑆 )

]

[𝛤𝑈 ,𝑋
03×1
0 

0 

, 𝛷𝐹 =

[03×3
𝐼3
0
𝜌𝛽𝑆 𝐿𝑤
1 − 𝛽𝑤

]

,

,

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

𝛽𝑤
1 
𝛽𝑆 (1 + 𝜌𝐿𝜀,𝑑 )
0 
0
⎤
−𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜌𝐿𝑝𝑑 )
⎥
⎥
0
⎦

0 
𝜌𝛽𝑆 𝐿𝜀,𝑔
0

0
𝜌𝛽𝑆 𝐿𝜀,𝜇
𝛽𝑤

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

, and

.

The dynamics of the observation vector are given by:

𝑌𝑡 = 𝐺𝑌 𝑌𝑡−1 + 𝐺𝐹 𝐹𝑡,

where

𝐺𝑌 =

[0 
0
0 𝐿𝑝𝑑

]

, and 𝐺𝐹 =

0 

[ 1 
0
𝐿𝑔 𝐿𝑆 𝐿𝑤 𝐿𝜀,𝑑 𝐿𝜀,𝑔 𝐿𝜀,𝜇

0 

1 

0 

(21)

]

.

Eqs. (20) and (21) constitute the state-space system that we choose

to estimate in our follow-up analysis.

2.3.  Model identification and estimation

We impose several parameter constraints to ensure that our model is
identified. First, we address the issue that the two loadings 𝐵𝜇 and 𝐵𝑔
cannot, in general, be distinguished from the persistence parameters
in  the  model.  In  this  respect,  we  follow  VBK  and  impose  the  same
parameter constraints in our model. In particular, we set 𝐵𝑔 at (1 −
𝜌𝜌𝑔)−1. This implies that 𝜆𝑔 =  0 when 𝐵𝑆 =  0 and 𝐵𝑤 =  0 in the
economy  studied  by  VBK,  in  which ̂𝑔𝑡 does  not  affect  the  expected
return.  We  also  set 𝐵𝜇 at (1 − 𝜌𝜌𝜇)−1 so  that 𝜆𝜇 =  (1 − 𝜌𝐵𝑆 𝛽𝑆 )−1.
As a result, if extrapolators are absent from the market or are made
irrelevant through arbitrage activities (i.e., if 𝐵𝑆 =  0 and 𝐵𝑤 =  0),
𝜆𝜇 collapses  to  one,  and 𝐸𝑡[𝑟𝑡+1]  = 𝜇𝑡.  In  other  words,  the  model
easily accommodates the irrelevance of extrapolators as a special case,
and in such a case, the usual result that expected returns equal the
discount rate applies. Overall, among the four loadings of our latent
processes on the pd ratio, 𝐵𝑆 and 𝐵𝑤 are the only free parameters to
be estimated. Both 𝐵𝜇 and 𝐵𝑔 are tied to the persistent parameters 𝜌𝜇
and 𝜌𝑔, respectively.

Our model is identified after imposing the above parameter con-
straints. To see this, when 𝐵𝑆 = 0 and 𝐵𝑤 = 0, extrapolators’ sentiment
(i.e., ̂𝑆𝑡 and ̂𝑤𝑡) disappear from both the pd ratio (i.e., (11)) and market
return dynamics (i.e., (12)). Our model collapses to VBK and is thus
≠ 0, 𝛽𝑆 and 𝛽𝑤 are identified from
identified.  With 𝐵𝑆
a projection of the pd ratio on a geometrically weighted average of
past  returns  and  a  geometrically  weighted  average  of  past  dividend

≠ 0 or 𝐵𝑤

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

growth  rates,  respectively.  A  simple  univariate  regression  of  the  pd
ratio on lagged returns or lagged dividend growth would not be able
to recover extrapolative beliefs correctly, due to an omitted-variable
problem. Simply put, such an approach would neglect the co-existence
of  both  return  extrapolation  and  cash-flow  extrapolation,  leading  to
biased estimates of either belief formation process. Our structural ap-
proach  circumvents  this  issue.  At  the  same  time,  the  intuition  for
why our structural model is able to simultaneously identify cash-flow
extrapolation (henceforth 𝑊 ) and return extrapolation (henceforth 𝑆)
in the data is simple: while both forms of expectations are weighted
sums of past market performance, they are ultimately weighted sums of
different quantities. Similarly, the time series of rational expectations
of dividend growth can be separated from extrapolative beliefs since
it captures investors’ forward-looking expectations of future dividend
growth. Finally, the discount rate takes the role of a residual in our
decomposition  since  it  is  used  to  match  the  variation  in  the  price–
dividend ratio of the market that cannot be accounted for by either
extrapolative beliefs or rational expectations of dividend growth. Since
our  discount-rate  variable  effectively  is  assigned  all  variation  in  the
price–dividend  ratio  that  cannot  be  matched  by  other  drivers,  it  is
possible  that  it  captures  something  other  than  discount  rates.  Later,
in Section 4, we present an extension of the model that incorporates
observable proxies for discount rates in our estimation.
To summarize, the parameter vector for our model is

𝛩 = [𝐵𝑆 , 𝛽𝑆 , 𝐵𝑤, 𝛽𝑤, 𝜌𝜇, 𝜌𝑔, 𝜎𝑑 , 𝜎𝑔, 𝜎𝜇]′

To maintain model parsimony (since we have only 76 annual observa-
tions), in the main model, we do not allow shock correlations.14 All
mean parameters are set at their sample means so we can focus on
demeaned  variables  to  estimate  our  model.  The  state  equations  are
given by (20), and the observation equations are given by (21). We
use the standard Kalman-Filtering technique to estimate our model. We
detail our estimation procedure in the Appendix, Appendix A.

2.4.  Data

To perform our analysis, we rely on several sources of data. First
and foremost, we use returns on the CRSP value-weighted index from
WRDS. These allow us to back out both the pd ratio of the market as
well as the monthly dividend payments. We define dividend growth as
the year-over-year growth in cumulative 12-month dividends, assuming
no dividend reinvestment. Given the seasonality in dividend payments,
we follow the present-value literature and focus on market dynamics
at the annual frequency. This leads to 76 annual observations in our
sample,  spanning  the  1946  to  2022  period.  Our  use  of  1946  as  the
starting year is to avoid data errors in the earlier periods, as emphasized
by VBK. Given our focus on extrapolation bias, another benefit of using
a simple dividend growth process (as opposed to the more complicated
market-reinvested dividend growth, for example) is that the dividend
process  is  not  confounded  with  the  past  return-driven  extrapolation
process.

To validate our novel measure of extrapolative sentiment, we also
make use of survey expectations. We focus on surveys that have been
used extensively in prior work. These are (i) the American Association
of Individual Investors (AAII); (ii) the Gallup Survey of Investor Op-
timism; (iii) the Investor Intelligence Survey (II); (iv) and surveys of
cash-flow extrapolation from Nagel and Xu (2022).15

14 In Section 4, we introduce an extension of the model that accounts for
cross-equation correlations in shocks. As showed in the Internet Appendix, our
results remain unchanged.
15 For prior research that has used these data, see De Bondt (1993), Vissing-
Jorgensen (2003), Greenwood  and  Shleifer (2014), Barberis  et  al. (2015),
and Cassella and Gulen (2018).

7 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Finally, in studying predictive regressions, we also consider several
controls from the return predictability literature that are sourced from
Amit Goyal’s website.

Given  the  large  number  of  possible  controls  and  the  relatively
small number of observations in our sample, we follow the approach
in Ludvigson and Ng (2009), who propose the use of principal compo-
nents in predictive regressions.

2.5.  Model estimates and implications

2.5.1.  Model estimates

Table 1 presents the estimation results. Panel A reports results for
the model parameters. For parameters common to our paper and VBK,
our  estimates  are  close  to  those  reported  in  VBK.  For  instance,  we
estimate 𝜌𝜇 (i.e., persistence in discount rate) to be 0.907, while VBK’s
estimate  is  0.932.  Our  estimate  of  the  persistence  in  the  expected
dividend growth rate (i.e., 𝜌𝑔) is 0.179, somewhat lower than VBK’s
corresponding estimate of 0.354.16 Taking into account the difference
in the sample and the modeling framework, we consider our estimates
for the baseline parameters close to those obtained in VBK.

Next,  we  turn  to  parameters  that  are  specific  to  our  model.  Our
estimate of the parameter 𝛽𝑆 determining decay in return extrapolative
expectations  is  0.464,  which  is  highly  significant  (𝑡-stat =  18.56  =
0.464∕0.025). This implies that extrapolators allocate a weight of 0.536
̂𝑆𝑡) and a weight of 0.464 to most recent returns
to lagged bias (i.e.,
(i.e., ̂𝑟𝑡+1), per (6). The coefficient estimate suggests that recent returns
matter  considerably  for  return-extrapolative  beliefs  and  that  lagged
yearly  returns  matter  about  half  as  much  as  the  most  recent  ones.
Thus, this result is qualitatively consistent with Greenwood and Shleifer
(2014) evidence of return extrapolation from surveys of returns. The
key parameter that captures the loading of the pd ratio on the extrapo-
lators’ sentiment, 𝐵𝑆 , is estimated to be 0.100 and is highly statistically
significant  (𝑡-stat =  4.20  =  0.1∕0.0238).  A  positive 𝐵𝑆 implies  that
positive sentiment is associated with an inflated pd ratio, consistent
with the role of return extrapolation in theory work by Barberis et al.
(2015).

Turning  to  cash-flow  extrapolation,  our  estimate  of 𝛽𝑤,  the  pa-
rameter determining decay in cash-flow extrapolative expectations, is
0.0004, which is small and not statistically different from zero. This
implies  that  cash-flow  extrapolators’  beliefs  have  a  much  stronger
persistence than the beliefs of return extrapolators and that the relevant
history of past cash flows that cash-flow extrapolators rely on is much
longer than the history of past returns that enters return-extrapolative
beliefs. This result resonates with the evidence of Nagel and Xu (2022),
who  point  out  the  much  longer  memory  that  is  embedded  in  cash-
flow extrapolative beliefs vis-a-vis return-extrapolation. As far as the
loading of cash-flow extrapolation on the price–dividend ratio 𝐵𝑤, it is
large and highly statistically significant (t-stat 5.70 = 232.70/40.80),
underscoring the importance of cash-flow extrapolation in rationalizing
variation in the price–dividend ratio.

The other estimated parameters reported in Table 1 are consistent
with the intuition of our model. For example, both 𝐵𝜇 and 𝐵𝑔 are esti-
mated to be positive. This result implies a negative (positive) response
of the pd ratio to discount rate (dividend-growth) news, respectively. As
another example, as in (13), the expected one-year market return loads
positively on the discount rate (through 𝜆𝜇), while it loads negatively
on  return  extrapolators’  sentiment  (through  a  negative  value  of 𝜆𝑆 )
and on cash-flow extrapolators’ sentiment (through a negative value
of 𝜆𝑤), and positively on dividend news. Note that both 𝜆𝑆 and 𝜆𝑤 are
statistically significant, hinting at a role of extrapolation in predictive
regressions. We examine such a role in detail later in the paper.

16 All  comparisons  are  based  on Table  2 in  VBK  for  the  case  of
cash-reinvested dividends, which is the relevant case for model comparison.

In Panel C of Table 1, we investigate how important the different
sources of variation in the pd ratio are. When we ask what is the con-
tribution of, say, cash-flow extrapolators, to the variance of aggregate
valuations,  we  are  inherently  asking  by  how  much  the  variance  of
the price–dividend ratio would change relative to the one observed in
the data in the counterfactual scenario where there are no cash-flow
extrapolators in the market. To answer this question, we consider, as
it is standard in other applications of structural estimation in finance,
a  counterfactual  scenario  in  which  cash-flow  extrapolators  have  left
the  market.  This  scenario  corresponds  to  measuring  the  variance  of
the pd ratio that is implied by our model when 𝐵𝑤 =  0. In such a
counterfactual scenario, we find that the variance of the pd ratio would
drop by close to 20%. This 20% contribution of cash-flow extrapolation
to the variance of the pd ratio is remarkably close to the simulation
results in Nagel and Xu (2022), Table 5.17

When  applying  the  same  approach  to  return  extrapolation,  our
results are also broadly in line with Nagel and Xu (2022). They argue
that return extrapolation is unlikely to account for much of the vari-
ation in the log price–dividend ratio, owing to the transitory nature
of  the  former,  which  makes  it  not  a  good  candidate  to  explain  the
latter.  Consistent  with  them,  we  find  that  a  counterfactual  scenario
in which return extrapolators have left the market (𝐵𝑆 =  0) implies
a  very  small  decline  in  the  variance  of  the  price–dividend  ratio.  Of
course,  this  need  not  mean  that  return  extrapolators  do  not  matter.
In fact, it is possible that there are periods of intensified extrapola-
tion  in  which,  for  instance,  the  degree  of  extrapolation  is  high  and
the  dynamics  of  the  dividend–price  ratio  change  considerably  as  a
result of return-extrapolative beliefs (e.g., Cassella and Gulen 2018).
These are, however, conditional effects that our approach, estimating
unconditional model parameters and full-sample relationships, would
not be able to account for. Finally, when considering discount rates and
rational expectations of cash-flow growth, our approach suggests that
discount rates are important, in that the variance of the price–dividend
ratio would decline by more than 90% with constant discount rates,
while the importance of rational cash-flow expectations is much more
modest. These results accord well with past work (e.g., Van Binsbergen
and Koijen 2010).

2.5.2.  Impulse response

We  also  examine  our  model  estimates  through  the  lens  of  im-
pulse  responses.  This  part  of  the  analysis  allows  us  to  compare  the
insights of our econometric models with the predictions of theories of
extrapolation in the market.

Fig. 1 plots the impulse responses for both the state variables ( ̂𝑆𝑡,
̂𝜇𝑡, and ̂𝑔𝑡) and the model-implied quantities (̂𝑝𝑑𝑡, 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1), and ̂𝑟𝑡)
̂𝑤𝑡
between  one  and  five  years  after  a  one-standard-deviation  positive
shock in one of the state variables at time 0. Panels A and B report
dynamics  following  shocks  to  return  extrapolation.  Panels  C  and  D
report dynamics following shocks to cash flow extrapolation. Panels E
and F report dynamics following shocks to the discount rate, and Panels
G and H present dynamics following shocks to rational expectations
of dividend growth. The response variables are also standardized with
respect to their respective standard deviations.

17 They find that in a model where variation in prices comes mainly from
cash-flow  extrapolation,  the  variance  of  the pd ratio  is  between  16%  and
36% of the actual variance of the pd ratio observed in the data. They report
results in terms of volatility of the log price–dividend ratio (0.30) versus the
model-implied volatilities of 0.12 and 0.18, depending on the model param-
eterization. When cast in terms of variance, the model-generated variance of
the pd ratio is between 16% (i.e., 0.122∕0.302) and 36% (0.182∕0.302) of the
actual variance of the pd ratio observed in the data. Said differently, this result
suggests that cash-flow extrapolation can explain about 20% of the observed
variance in the price–dividend ratio. Thus, we obtain a similar result with a
completely distinct empirical analysis.

8 

S. Cassella et al.

For brevity, we concentrate on shocks to extrapolation. As Fig. 1
shows, a positive shock in return extrapolation at time 0 implies an
increase in the price–dividend ratio. Such an increase is rather modest,
and it reverts to the mean quickly due to the relatively high value of the
structural parameter 𝛽𝑆 governing return extrapolation. Moreover, an
increase in return extrapolation leads to lower expected and realized
returns  in  the  future.  Finally,  a  movement  in  return  extrapolation
does not per se generate changes to the other state variables. When
comparing  the  implications  of  return-extrapolation  shocks  and  cash-
flow extrapolation shocks for returns and the pd ratio, there are several
similarities, but there are also important differences. First, an increase
in extrapolative beliefs about cash flows has a spillover effect on return
extrapolation,  in  that  an  increase  in  cash-flow  extrapolation  raises
prices today. Such an increase boosts return extrapolation today, but
lowers extrapolation in the future due to the negative relation between
cash-flow extrapolation and future returns.18 Second, since cash-flow
extrapolation is a rather persistent process, a shock today leads cash
flow extrapolation to remain high for a long time in the future. This
high  persistence  in  extrapolative  beliefs  about  cash  flows  generates
persistence in the behavior of the log price–dividend ratio, which grows
following a rise in cash flow extrapolation and remains high for many
years afterward.

Shocks to discount rates cause a decline in prices and returns today,
leading  to  lower  return  extrapolation  today  and  a  slow  increase  in
the future, as higher discount rates turn into higher future returns on
average. On the other hand, discount rates have no impact on cash flow
extrapolation. Finally, in our model, shocks to expectations of dividend
growth lead to an increase in prices today, as in the traditional present-
value relation. However, due to the low persistence in 𝑔, the impact on
the price–dividend ratio is rather mild, and so is the impact on asset
returns, leading to only a small response by return extrapolation. The
main takeaway of this part of the analysis is that shocks to different
state variables will have different implications for the behavior of asset
valuation, returns, and expected returns.

2.6.  Model extensions

2.6.1.  Incorporating observable proxies for discount rates

One limitation of our approach concerns the modeling of the dis-
count rate. In our model, the discount rate process is identified from
the variation in the price–dividend ratio of the market that cannot be
accounted for with the other three latent processes that we consider.
As such, what we refer to as a discount rate can capture drivers of
asset  valuations  that  are  rather  distinct  from  risk  preferences.  One
solution  to  this  problem  is  to  extend  our  model  to  explicitly  link
variation  in  the  discount-rate  process  to  some  observable  proxy  for
risk preferences. We pursue this solution and present, in the Internet
Appendix, Section IA1, an extended model that incorporates observable
metrics for discount rates in our analysis. We discuss the implications
on predictive regressions of this extended model in Section 4.

2.6.2.  Correlated innovations

One  caveat  in  interpreting  our  main  results  is  that  our  model
shuts  down  potential  correlations  in  innovations  to  maintain  model
parsimony. While this approach eases estimation, it may lead to over-
simplified dynamics. In our Internet Appendix Section IA1 we present
an  extended  version  of  our  model  that  allows  shock  correlations  in
the state variables. There, we also report our model estimates. These
estimates do not differ much from the estimates in our main analysis.
We discuss the implications on predictive regressions of this extended
model in Section 4.

18 Specifically, in Eq. (16), the cell (3,4) of Matrix 𝛤 matrix capturing the re-
lation between lagged cash-flow extrapolation and future return extrapolation
is negative, due to a negative value of the estimated parameter 𝜆𝑤 in Table 1.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

3.  Validating the model

The purpose of this section is to investigate the properties of our
newly estimated time series of extrapolative expectations, 𝑆 and 𝑊 .
Since our approach to obtaining extrapolative beliefs is based on prices
rather  than  surveys,  we  are  particularly  interested  in  how  well  our
model can recover underlying unobservable extrapolative beliefs. To
this end, we perform three pieces of analysis. In Section 3.1, we present
the results of simulations aimed at assessing how well our model is
able to jointly recover extrapolative beliefs alongside discount rates and
rational expectations of dividend growth for a broad set of possible
model parameters. In Section 3.2 we use another form of validation
of our approach to measuring extrapolative beliefs through prices. In
particular, having estimated our model based on the US stock market,
we can rely on several surveys collected in the US and ask how well our
structural measures of extrapolation track survey-based extrapolative
metrics. Finally, Section 3.3 investigates the predictive properties of
our price-based gauges of extrapolative beliefs for future returns. Like
in the previous section, the focus is on comparing the ability to predict
future returns using survey-based measures with the ability to do so
using our price-based metrics for extrapolation.

3.1.  Simulation analysis

3.1.1.  Setup

To study the performance of the Kalman-Filtering-based estimation
in the context of our model of Section 2.2, we conduct an extensive
simulation analysis. We first set the true population parameters at ̂𝛩—
the parameter estimates given in Table 1, Panel A. For each simulation
run (indexed by 𝑑, 𝑑 =  1, 2, … , 𝐷 =  500), we start from the steady
state; that is, all state variables are set at their unconditional means (or,
equivalently, all demeaned state variables are set at zero). We simulate
76 years of data by randomly generating normally and independently
(both cross-sectionally and across time) distributed shocks for the three
innovations in our model (i.e., 𝜀𝜇 ,𝑡+1, 𝜀𝑔 ,𝑡+1, and 𝜀𝑑 ,𝑡+1). Ultimately, in
each simulation, we create an artificial time series of the pd ratio based
on Eq. (11). We then use the same Kalman-filtering techniques used
in  the  analysis  of  the  actual  data  in  the  paper  to  extract  the  latent
processes in our model. We repeat the simulation 500 times so as to
obtain  a  mean  and  median  pairwise  correlation  between  the  latent
variables created as part of the simulations and the latent time series
filtered from the data.

We base our main simulations on the model parameters estimated
from  the  data  in Table  1.  Of  course,  these  parameters  are  only  es-
timates, and we are interested in how robust our methodology is to
different values of model parameters. Therefore, we probe our results
for robustness to alternative parameterizations of the data. Since there
are  many  model  parameters,  it  is  difficult  to  experiment  with  all
possible  combinations  of  such  parameters.  To  offer  a  parsimonious
description of the simulation results, we focus on varying only a subset
of model parameters. We argue that, for some parameters, such as the
persistence of the discount-rate process or the persistence of the ratio-
nal dividend-growth expectations, our estimates align fairly well with
estimates from other studies. Thus, there is less of a need to perform
simulations with alternative values of these parameters. Instead, given
that  the  novelty  of  our  approach  lies  in  incorporating  extrapolative
beliefs in the present-value relation, we perform simulations for dif-
ferent combinations of the extrapolators’ decay parameters 𝛽𝑆 and 𝛽𝑤.
In some of these simulations, we make the two parameters closer to
each other than in the data. Effectively, this amounts to changing the
persistence of these two series so as to ascertain how much the success
of our model depends on differences in the time-series properties of
these two distinct latent processes. We are also interested in how robust
the identification of different latent processes is to the nature of the
shocks in our model, particularly with respect to the heterogeneity in
the variance of such shocks. To this end, unlike in the data, in all our
additional simulations, we assume the three shocks in our system to
have an equal standard deviation of 1%.

9 

S. Cassella et al.

3.1.2.  Simulation results

Table  3 shows  the  results  of  the  simulations.  In  the  Table,  the
column labeled ‘‘Data’’ is meant to represent the results of simulations
involving the exact values of model parameters that are estimated from
the data in Table 1. All other statistics refer to additional simulations
where 𝜎𝜇 = 𝜎𝑑 = 𝜎𝑔 = 1%, 𝜌𝜇 = 0.9, 𝜌𝑔 = 0.2, 𝐵𝑆 = 0.1, and 𝐵𝑤 = 200,
and where extrapolation weight parameters are varied as indicated on
the top of the Table.

The table shows that all latent time series can be jointly recovered
by our estimation procedure quite accurately. Across different param-
eterizations of the model, the mean (median) correlation between the
actual discount rate and the recovered one is around 81%. Similarly,
the mean (median) correlation between actual and estimated return-
extrapolation sentiment is around 83%, while it is 90% for cash-flow
extrapolation.  Results  are  very  similar  when  focusing  only  on  the
data-based parameterizations of the model. Overall, the results of the
simulation  showcase  the  ability  of  our  model  to  jointly  recover  the
latent variables in our augmented present-value identity.

3.2.  Relation between survey-based and structurally estimated extrapolation
metrics

to 

refer 

three 

Aside from using simulation analysis to validate our estimation, we
also ask how well our price-based measures of extrapolation match the
survey data. Table 2 reports pairwise correlations between our price-
based return extrapolation metric 𝑆 and three widely used surveys of
return expectations, the American Association of Individual Investors
Survey (AAII ), the Gallup Survey of Investor Optimism (GALLUP), and
the Investor Intelligence Surveys (II). We also construct a combination
of 
these 
as
𝑆 𝑈 𝑅𝑉 𝐸 𝑌 𝑆𝑅𝐸 𝑇 .19

time-series,  which  we 

Across surveys, and as the left picture of Fig. 2, Panel A confirms,
the correlation between 𝑆 and survey-based expectations is generally
positive.  While  the  correlation  between 𝑆 and  raw  survey  data  on
return expectations is positive, it is also the case that not all variation in
the time series of survey expectations comes from return extrapolation.
For  instance,  Greenwood  and  Shleifer  (2014), Table  4,  estimates  a
regression  of  survey  expectations  on  a  weighted  sum  of  past  stock
returns. Across surveys, the average 𝑅2 of this model is only 37.5%,
indicating  that  there  is  a  large  fraction  of  the  variation  in  survey
beliefs that is unrelated to extrapolation. Thus, we argue that a more
informative comparison is between 𝑆 and the extrapolative component
of surveys of return expectations,20 To that end, we also construct a
survey-based extrapolation time series that is the more relevant survey-
based  counterpart  to  our  structurally  estimated  return-extrapolation
measure. To this end, we follow Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), who
gauge the extrapolative nature of survey expectations by means of a
regression of survey expectations on past stock market returns 𝑅(𝑡−𝑗):

SURVEYS𝑅𝐸 𝑇 𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏

60
∑

𝑤𝑗 𝑅(𝑡−𝑗+1) + 𝜖𝑡,

𝑤𝑗 =

𝑗=1
(𝜆)(𝑗−1)
𝑘=1(𝜆)(𝑘−1)

∑𝑁

.

(22)

The left-hand side is represented by the survey expectations principal
component SURVEYS𝑅𝐸 𝑇 , which is available between 1996 and 2011 at
the monthly frequency. On the right-hand side, the weight assigned to
𝑗-quarter lagged returns, 𝑤𝑗 , accommodates the possibility that recent
returns have a larger impact on expectations. Like prior literature, we
set 𝑁 =  60,  i.e.,  we  use  15  years  of  past  return  history.  Then  we
use the in-sample parameter estimates { ̂𝑎, ̂𝑏, ̂𝜆} jointly with past stock

19 See Atmaz et al. (2024), Appendix D, for more details.
20 One can think of the component of expectations that is orthogonal to
extrapolation as due to other behavioral biases, or to noise and measurement
error.

10 

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

market returns to construct a long time series of extrapolative beliefs
that span the sample period 1946–2022. We refer to the resulting time-
series as SURVEYS𝑋
𝑅𝐸 𝑇 . When we estimate the correlation between 𝑆
and SURVEYS𝑋
𝑅𝐸 𝑇 in Table 2, we find it is almost 70%, underscoring the
high degree to which our price-based extrapolation measure resembles
the survey-based direct measure of extrapolation. This high correlation
is evident in the left graph Fig. 2, Panel B.

We  perform  a  similar  comparison  concerning  cash  flow  extrapo-
lation.  We consider two relevant comparisons in this case.  The first
comparison is between our structural measure of cash flow extrapo-
lation 𝑊 and raw survey data on cash flow expectations from Nagel
and Xu (2022). We refer to this time series as SURVEYS𝐶 𝐹 . The sec-
ond  comparison  concerns  the  extrapolative  component  of  cash-flow
expectations, which we label SURVEYS𝑋
𝐶 𝐹 , and which is obtained based
on the model of asset pricing with fading memory of Nagel and Xu
(2022).21 We  find  our  price-based  extrapolation  metric  to  be  highly
correlated with both the cash flow expectations survey (59%) and its
extrapolation component (46%). The two right figures in Panel A and
Panel B of Fig. 2 speak to the high degree of comovement between
our  price-based  cash  flow  extrapolation  metric  and  its  survey-based
counterpart.

To  complement  the  analysis  above, Fig.  2 Panel  C  overlays  the
price–dividend ratio of the market with our price-based extrapolation
time series. The figure shows the high degree of correlation between
cash-flow extrapolation and the pd ratio (79%), while the correlation
of the pd ratio with return extrapolation is rather small (below 1%),
resonating with prior evidence (e.g., Nagel and Xu 2022). In sum, the
correlation  analysis  indicates  that 𝑆 and 𝑤 are  consistent  with  the
evidence of extrapolative expectations from surveys.

3.3.  Return predictability tests

One key tenet of theories of extrapolation in financial markets is
that extrapolative beliefs lead to mispricing and thus hold a negative
relation  with  future  market  returns.  This  is  also  an  outcome  in  our
model, as shown earlier in (13). So far, the evidence of predictability by
extrapolative beliefs in the literature is rather mixed.22 The evidence is
also fragmented in that some studies analyze the predictive properties
of  return  expectations,  while  others  examine  the  role  of  cash-flow
expectations  for  returns.  This  fragmentation  can,  in  part,  be  due  to
the fact that data on return expectations and cash flow expectations
is often collected using heterogeneous means and survey populations
or over heterogeneous sample periods, making it difficult to conduct a
unified assessment of the predictive properties of extrapolative beliefs
for  future  returns.  The  aim  of  this  section  is  to  use  our  estimated
extrapolation time series to test for the role of extrapolation in return
predictability. Our primary goal is to compare the performance of our
price-based  extrapolation  measures  with  the  survey-based  measures.
Our second goal is to offer a comparison of the predictive ability of
return extrapolation and cash flow extrapolation in a setting where the
measurement of both processes happens jointly.

We begin by performing, in Table 4, in-sample predictability tests
of  future  aggregate  stock  returns  for  horizons  of  3  months  (Panel
A),  12  months  (Panel  B),  and  36  months  (Panel  C).  In  the  table,
we  regress  future  annualized  log  cumulative  market  returns  on  our
four  time  series: 𝑆 (return  extrapolation), 𝜇 (rational  expectations),
𝑔 (expected dividend growth), and 𝑤 (cashflow extrapolation). In all

21 Data for these two additional time-series is from Zhengyang Xu’s website,
https://sites.google.com/view/zhengyxu/data.
22 Greenwood  and  Shleifer (2014)  find  only  mixed  evidence  that  return
expectations can predict future market returns, in that some surveys are able
to predict subsequent realized market returns, while others do not. In another
study, Nagel and Xu (2022) show evidence of predictability of future market
returns by survey-based cash flow extrapolation.

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

tests, we standardize the regressors to a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one. We use 𝜇 and 𝑔 as estimated by our model, while 𝑆
𝑅𝐸 𝑇 and SURVEY𝑋
and 𝑤 are either sourced from surveys (SURVEYS𝑋
𝐶 𝐹 ,
respectively) or from our own structural estimation as indicated in the
heading  of  each  panel.  Since  regressions  are  run  using  yearly  data,
some of our results are based on the use of overlapping observations.
Therefore,  we  use  a  block-bootstrapping  approach  for  inference.  In
addition to the OLS coefficient estimates, we also report bootstrapped
95%  confidence  intervals  and  bootstrapped 𝑝-values.  For  our  main
variables of interest, 𝑆 and 𝑤, we are interested in testing the null of
no predictability against the one-sided behavioral hypothesis that over-
reaction in extrapolative beliefs is followed by correction and lower
returns. To this end, we also report one-sided left-tail bootstrapped 𝑝-
values. The table measures each model’s goodness-of-fit by means of
the adjusted 𝑅2 statistic, which allows us to compare the performance
of different models in the presence of a different number of regressors
across models. Moreover, in each of the regressions where we include
extrapolative  beliefs  on  the  right-hand  side,  we  test  the  hypothesis
that extrapolative beliefs have no predictive power for future returns
by means of an F-test of the joint hypothesis that the predictability
coefficients of 𝑆 and 𝑤 are jointly equal to zero.

Column  (1)  in  each  panel  of Table  4 provides  estimation  results
for  a  baseline  specification  that  only  contains 𝜇 and 𝑔.  In  Columns
(2)  and  (5),  we  predict  returns  in  a  regression  that  only  includes
extrapolative beliefs. In Columns (3) and (6), we estimate a predictive
model  featuring  the  four  latent  processes  estimated  as  part  of  our
model. Finally, Columns (4) and (7) augment the full specification with
a control variable that, in the spirit of Ludvigson and Ng (2009), is
the first principal component of a large set of time-series predictors of
future stock returns.23

We start by describing the results of quarter-ahead predictability
regressions. In Column (1), neither 𝜇 nor 𝑔 predict future stock returns
at the standard level of statistical significance. Moreover, the adjusted
𝑅2 is small. In Columns (2) and (5), we find evidence of short-term
predictability by cash flow extrapolation. Return extrapolation loads
negatively on future returns, but the predictive coefficient is not sta-
tistically significant at conventional levels. The predictive properties of
survey-based and price-based extrapolation metrics are rather similar,
although the model using price-based metrics is better able at matching
variation of future returns, with an 𝑅2 that is almost three times as large
as  the  one  obtained  when  using  survey-based  extrapolation  metrics.
When estimating the full model in Columns (3) and (6), we notice a
decline in the adjusted 𝑅2, and the loadings on 𝜇 and 𝑔 remain not
statistically  significant.  Moreover,  whereas  when  using  survey  data,
there is no statistical evidence of a relationship between extrapolation
and  future  returns,  our  price-based  return  extrapolation  proxy  is  a
significant negative predictor of future returns with a one-sided 𝑝-value
of 0.08, and cash flow extrapolation is significantly negatively linked
to future returns with a one-sided 𝑝-value of 0.01. In addition, when
using our price-based extrapolation proxies in Column (5), the null of
no role of extrapolation for future returns is rejected at the 5% level
of significance. The predictability by 𝑆 and 𝑤 becomes weaker when

23 The principal component is obtained based on the following predictors.
These include default yield spread (dfy), inflation (infl), stock return variance
(svar), aggregate payout ratio (de), long-term yield (lty), term spread (tms),
the 𝑡-bill rate (tbl), long-term returns (ltr), aggregate earnings-to-price (ep),
aggregate book-to-market (bm), the investment-to-capital ratio (ik), net equity
expansion  (ntis),  percent  equity  issuing  (eqis),  the  aggregate  consumption-
wealth  ratio  (cay),  the  default  return  spread  (dfr),  and  the  cross-sectional
premium  (csp).  Details  on  the  construction  of  these  variables  are  in Goyal
and  Welch (2008).  We  follow  the  approach  of Ludvigson  and  Ng (2009)
because we have a finite sample, and including all control variables would
result in overfitting. Predictors are from Amit Goyal’s website. Later in the
Appendix, , for robustness we also estimate the predictive regressions using
the aforementioned individual predictors in lieu of their principal component.

introducing controls, although cash flow extrapolation appears to still
predict  returns  with  a  one-sided 𝑝-value  of  0.04  when  we  measure
extrapolation using our approach.

Overall,  the  quarter-ahead  results  underscore  the  similar  predic-
tive  properties  of  survey-based  metrics  and  price-based  proxies  for
extrapolation,  and  they  provide  suggestive  evidence  that  the  latter
offer stronger predictive power for future returns than the former. This
evidence  is  reinforced  in  Panel  B  of Table  4,  in  which  we  perform
the predictability analysis at the yearly forecasting horizon. These tests
show that 𝜇 has predictive power for future returns. 𝜇 retains its pre-
dictive power when we introduce survey-based extrapolators metrics
in the regression, but it becomes insignificant when we control for our
price-based extrapolation measures. Moreover, while both survey-based
and proxy-based return-extrapolation measures are significant predic-
tors of future returns, cash-flow extrapolation has predictive power for
future  returns  only  when  it  is  measured  via  our  price-based  proxy.
The joint significance of price-based cashflow- and return-extrapolation
measures  in  predicting  returns  is  underscored  by  the  F-test  of  joint
significance,  which,  across  specifications,  rejects  the  null  of  no  pre-
dictability by extrapolation with an average 𝑝-value of 0.04. Finally, the
overall goodness of fit of the model is higher when using price-based
proxies. For instance, when comparing Columns (2) and (5), where we
predict returns only using extrapolative beliefs, the adjusted 𝑅2 is 4%
if we use survey-based extrapolation measures, but it rises to 11% with
our filtered time series of extrapolative beliefs.

In summary, the results of the predictive tests at the yearly horizon
strengthen  the  view  that  survey-based  and  price-based  measures  of
extrapolation have similar predictive properties and that price-based
measures  can  be  somewhat  more  successful  at  predicting  returns  at
the intermediate prediction horizon of a year. The last set of results
concerns the long-term predictability of 3-year ahead returns. In this
last  set  of  tests,  the  predictive  power  of  the  discount  rate  strength-
ens considerably across specifications. Moreover, we note that there
is  stronger  evidence  of  return  predictability  by  survey-based  return
extrapolation as opposed to our price-based return extrapolation, while
the evidence in favor of the predictive power of cash flow extrapolation
is  comparable  across  metrics.  Overall,  across  horizons,  our  results
indicate that survey-based and price-based extrapolation proxies share
similar predictive properties. The results also indicate that there may be
benefits in integrating these alternative metrics into a unified measure.
This is an interesting topic that we leave to future research.

Lastly, as far as the relative importance of return extrapolation and
cash-flow extrapolation for the predictability of returns is concerned,
our results indicate that both are important. The size of the predictabil-
ity, represented by the magnitude of the predictability coefficients, is
quite comparable, and there are several specifications in which both
cash  flow  extrapolation  and  return  extrapolation  exhibit  predictive
power for future returns. There is also some evidence that predictability
by  return  extrapolation  may  be  stronger  at  short  and  intermediate
horizons and be weak or absent at longer horizons. In contrast, cash
flow extrapolation appears to predict returns at all prediction horizons.

3.4.  Out-of-sample predictability

We  complement  the  in-sample  analysis  of  the  previous  section
with out-of-sample (OOS) predictability statistics. These are Campbell
and  Thompson (2008)  and Goyal  and  Welch (2008)  out-of-sample
𝑅2,  and Clark  and  West (2007)  statistic  for  the  comparison  of  the
out-of-sample performance of nested models. When comparing the out-
of-sample fit of two predictive models, 𝑀𝑗 and 𝑀𝑘, over a sample of 𝑇
observations, the OOS 𝑅2 is obtained as

𝑅2
𝑂 𝑂 𝑆(𝑗 ,𝑘) = 1 −

∑𝑇 −1

𝑡=0 (𝑟𝑡+1 − ̂𝑟𝑘𝑡)2
𝑡=0 (𝑟𝑡+1 − ̂𝑟𝑗 𝑡)2

∑𝑇 −1

,

(23)

where 𝑟𝑡+1 is the next-period realized return, ̂𝑟𝑘𝑡 is the prediction of 𝑟𝑡+1
that model 𝑀𝑘 casts at time t, and ̂𝑟𝑗 𝑡 is the prediction of 𝑟𝑡+1 made by

11 

S. Cassella et al.

model 𝑀𝑗 . A positive value of 𝑅2
𝑂 𝑂 𝑆(𝑗 ,𝑘) indicates that the out-of-sample
mean-squared forecasting error obtained under model 𝑀𝑘 is smaller
than  the  mean-squared  forecasting  error  of  model 𝑀𝑗 ,  and,  hence,
𝑀𝑘 has  a  better  out-of-sample  performance  than 𝑀𝑗 .  Conversely,  a
negative value of 𝑅2
𝑂 𝑂 𝑆(𝑗 ,𝑘) suggests better out-of-sample predictability
is obtained using model 𝑀𝑗 .

Having outlined in (13) the Equation for expected returns in our
model, we consider three models of returns that are relevant in our
setting:
𝑀0 ∶ 𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝑎 + 𝜖0(𝑡+1)
𝑀1 ∶ 𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝑎 + 𝑏(𝜆𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜆𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡) + 𝜖1(𝑡+1)
𝑀2 ∶ 𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝑎 + 𝑏(𝜆𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜆𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝜆𝑆

̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝜆𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡) + 𝜖2(𝑡+1)

Model 𝑀0 is the naive forecast, i.e., the prediction that the future
stock  market  return  is  equal  to  the  historical  average.  Model 𝑀1 is
a model of future returns that only relies on discount rates (𝜇𝑡) and
expected dividend growth (𝑔𝑡) to predict future returns but neglects
extrapolative expectations. In other words, 𝑀1 is a model where we
restrict 𝜆𝑆 and 𝜆𝑤 in (13) to be equal to zero. 𝑀2 is the full model that
augments 𝑀1 with 𝑆𝑡 and 𝑤𝑡, as per (13).

When considering model 𝑀2, we follow the same approach adopted
in the in-sample tests of Table 4, in that we present results both when
𝑆 and 𝑤 are structurally estimated and when they are based on survey
data.

Each model’s time-𝑡 forecast of 𝑟𝑡+1 is based on the in-sample pa-
rameter estimates obtained with the data available between the sample
start date (i.e., 1946) and time 𝑡 − 1. These estimates are then used
jointly with the values of the model regressors a and b at time 𝑡 to cast
an out-of-sample one-period ahead prediction.24 Once all forecast errors
are available, they are used in the calculation of the out-of-sample 𝑅2
as in (23). VBK set the minimum in-sample size to be equal to half
the sample. On the other hand, since the out-of-sample 𝑅2 is sensitive
to the choice of the out-of-sample period, we report results for two
alternative OOS start dates, 1973 (i.e., first out-of-sample estimation
based on 25 years of in-sample data) and 1998 (i.e., first out-of-sample
estimation based on 50 years of in-sample data).

The results of this part of the analysis are in Panel A of Table 5. Like
VBK, we concentrate on out-of-sample predictability of year-ahead cu-
mulative log market returns. In the table, the column labeled 𝑀1𝑣𝑠𝑀0
reports the out-of-sample 𝑅2 of the bivariate model vis-a-vis the naive
forecasting. Similarly, 𝑀2𝑣𝑠𝑀0 refers to a comparison of the full model
with the naive forecast. Finally, to gauge the benefit of modeling an
extrapolative expectations component in addition to discount rates and
expected dividend growth, we also report results for the comparison
𝑀2𝑣𝑠𝑀1.

We consider two types of out-of-sample statistics. The first, labeled
as ‘‘FS’’, is based on filtering over the full sample (1946 to 2022). The
second, labeled ‘‘OOS’’, takes a more conservative approach, as it is
based on the econometrician’s use of the recursively estimated model
parameters to back out the time-𝑡 values of the filtered time-series based
on information available up to time 𝑡 only.25

We start by describing the comparison 𝑀2𝑣𝑠𝑀1, which is the most
relevant case in light of the in-sample results reported earlier. We first
focus on the results of the analysis based on our structural estimates
of  extrapolative  beliefs.  Across  different  out-of-sample  starting  dates
and  different  measurements  of  the  filtered  states,  the  out-of-sample
𝑅2 is  consistently  positive  and  large,  ranging  from  0.76%  to  about
2.42%.  This  resonates  with  our  in-sample  finding  on  the  usefulness
of incorporating extrapolative expectations into a model of expected
returns.  These  results  are  qualitatively  similar  to  the  ones  that  we

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

obtain when using survey-based extrapolation metrics as opposed to
our structurally estimated measures. This result further reinforces the
view that our approach is able to render an accurate representation of
extrapolative beliefs in the market.

The second metric we consider is Clark and West (2007) statistic.
The statistic is used to compare the out-of-sample forecasting accuracy
of a linear predictive model (𝑀𝑘) with the accuracy of a more parsi-
monious model 𝑀𝑗 where some of the predictability coefficients are
restricted to be equal to 0. Since this statistic is meant to be used for
nested models, we can use it to compare 𝑀0 with 𝑀1 and with 𝑀2, but
we cannot use it to compare 𝑀1 with 𝑀2, since neither model nests the
other one.

The statistic is formally defined as

𝐶 𝑊𝑂 𝑂 𝑆(𝑗 ,𝑘) = 2

1
𝑇

𝑇 −1
∑

𝑡=0

𝐹 𝐸𝑗 𝑡[𝐹 𝐸𝑗 𝑡 − 𝐹 𝐸𝑘𝑡],

where 𝐹 𝐸𝑗 𝑡 and 𝐹 𝐸𝑘𝑡 are the forecast errors of model 𝑀𝑗 and model
𝑀𝑘,  respectively.  Under  the  null,  the  parsimonious  model  generates
the data, and hence model 𝑀𝑘 will generate, on average larger mean-
squared out-of-sample forecast errors (FE) than model 𝑀𝑗 , i.e., 𝐶 𝑊𝑂 𝑂 𝑆
is negative. Under the alternative hypothesis, the out-of-sample forecast
errors  from  the  augmented  model 𝑀𝑘 are  smaller  than  the  forecast
errors from model 𝑀𝑗 , i.e., 𝐶 𝑊𝑂 𝑂 𝑆 is positive. Moreover, Clark and
West (2007) show that testing the alternative hypothesis of a higher
forecasting accuracy by model 𝑀𝑘 can be accomplished by regressing
the time-series of 𝐹 𝐸𝑗 𝑡[𝐹 𝐸𝑗 𝑡 − 𝐹 𝐸𝑘𝑡] on a constant and comparing the
obtained 𝑡-statistic with standard one-sided critical values of 1.28 (10%
rejection rate), 1.64 (5% rejection rate), or 1.96 (1% rejection rate).

Panel B of Table 5 reports the results for this part of the analysis. We
focus on 𝑀2𝑣𝑠𝑀0, that is, the comparison between the bivariate model
that neglects extrapolative beliefs, and the full model that accounts for
such beliefs. Across the eight different versions of the test, we find that
the Clark and West (2007) statistic is always positive. This indicates
that  incorporating  extrapolative  expectations  into  a  model  of  short-
term market returns is useful. Moreover, echoing the results involving
the  OOS 𝑅2,  the  performance  of  the  models  is  rather  comparable
when  using  our  structural  approach  to  recovering  beliefs  and  when
using survey-based measures of beliefs. Overall, these results give us
additional confidence about the ability of our model to recover beliefs
from market valuations.

4.  Model extensions and discussion

The most straightforward extension of our baseline model is to allow
the innovations in Eq. (15) to be cross-correlated. We present this ex-
tended model in the Internet Appendix, Section IA1, where we refer to
this model as 𝑀𝑐 𝑐 𝑒. The second extension concerns modeling discount
rates by incorporating some observable proxy for risk preferences in the
model. This second model, which we refer to as 𝑀𝑍 , is also presented
in detail in Section IA1 of the Internet Appendix. Table A3.1 in the
Appendix shows pairwise correlations between the estimates of return
extrapolation obtained using our main model of Section 2, as well as
𝑀𝑐 𝑐 𝑒 and 𝑀𝑍 . We find the time series of extrapolative beliefs extracted
from the main model of Section 2.2 and the time series of extrapolative
beliefs  obtained  from  the  extended  models  to  be  more  than  99%
correlated. This result underscores the robustness of our results. Table
IA.2 in the Internet Appendix also repeats the return-predictability tests
using the alternative measures of extrapolative beliefs from 𝑀𝑐 𝑐 𝑒 and
𝑀𝑍 . The results are similar to the one in our main Table 4.

4.1.  Discussion

24 This procedure guarantees that no overlap exists between the in-sample
parameter estimation and the out-of-sample prediction.
25 FS corresponds to full-sample filtering with hindsight. OOS corresponds
to progressive filtering (without hindsight).

Our approach to measuring extrapolative beliefs from market prices
has three main benefits. First and foremost, our methodology does not
rely on survey data, whose coverage is often limited to only a small set
of investors, some sample periods, and some markets and countries. In

12 

S. Cassella et al.

contrast, since our estimation only relies on observable market quanti-
ties (i.e., pd ratios and market returns), the approach proposed in this
paper is portable and can be applied to multiple settings where surveys
are  lacking.  Second  and  related,  several  researchers  have  expressed
concerns in the past over the use of surveys in asset pricing tests due
to  the  potential  lack  of  quality  of  survey  data  and  a  limited  time-
series sample. Our market-based approach circumvents these concerns
because we extract investors’ beliefs from prices. Third, surveys do not
only measure extrapolative beliefs but also other biases. By comparison,
our  structural  approach  imposes  economically  motivated  functional
forms for extrapolative beliefs, thus allowing us to recover a component
of beliefs that is only due to extrapolation as opposed to other sources
of deviations from rationality. Of course, this strength of our approach
also represents a limitation: if other drivers of beliefs exist that lead
to deviations from rationality and mispricing, then our model is going
to miss these drivers, and the relevance of extrapolation for aggregate
valuation may not be fully representative of how much, as a whole,
biases in beliefs matter in the market. There is recent evidence that
biases in beliefs other than extrapolation can affect asset prices in the
aggregate (e.g., Bordalo et al. 2024). For this reason, we caution the
reader that the survey-based approach does not only entail difficulties
but can rather offer advantages that the narrower scope of our approach
cannot easily match.

4.2.  Preferences or beliefs

Setting aside the benefits of our approach, we acknowledge there
are also some reasons why, if survey data was available in real time
for any given market of interest, one could prefer to test behavioral
theories  using  surveys.  The  main  reason  why  surveys  could  be  pre-
ferred over a market-based measure of beliefs is that there is a widely
held view in financial economics that, given market prices alone, we
cannot separate preferences and beliefs. Thus, when recovering beliefs
from  prices,  one  must  be  concerned  that  some  of  the  variation  in
extrapolative beliefs that we measure is not, in fact, due to incorrect
beliefs but may instead stem from some preferences. With respect to
this  concern,  we  notice  that  structurally  estimating  a  very  specific
functional  form  for  extrapolative  beliefs  in  the  way  we  do  may,  to
some  extent,  help  alleviate  this  concern.  Moreover,  our  structurally
estimated extrapolation time-series accord well with survey-based data
on investor beliefs about future fundamentals and future returns. That
said, we acknowledge the importance of surveys as a direct gauge of
survey beliefs, and we leave the task of integrating survey data with
our structural estimates of extrapolative beliefs to future research.

5.  Conclusion

The question of whether behavioral biases matter in financial mar-
kets is one of the most debated issues in academic finance. On the one
hand, a rational expectations view of the market dismisses biases as
irrelevant.  This  is  either  because  biases  are  idiosyncratic  and  hence
disappear in the aggregate or because arbitrage forces quickly correct
any mispricing induced by behavioral agents, thus marginalizing the
role of biases for price formation. The alternative view is that arbitrage
faces severe constraints and that biases are not idiosyncratic. Rather,
biases are driven by common heuristic rules of belief formation, which
systematically lead investors to deviate from rational expectations and
lead prices to deviate from fundamentals.

This paper provides a key contribution to this extant debate as we
set out to assess the role of a common source of biased beliefs in the
equity market, namely, extrapolation for stock prices. Existing work
that attempts to shed light on the role of extrapolation in the market is
fraught with empirical limitations. The paucity of long-running surveys
on  expectations,  as  well  as  the  lack  of  a  direct  connection  between
survey  data  on  beliefs,  investor  behavior,  and  asset  prices,  hinders
researchers’  ability  to  test  behavioral  theories.  Our  novel  approach

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

addresses these limitations head-on as we aim to extract the time series
of extrapolative beliefs in the marketplace directly from asset prices.
Our  methodology  inherently  nests  the  traditional  finance  view  as  a
special case and identifies biases only to the extent that these biases
matter.

Our results provide evidence consistent with recent behavioral the-
ories of asset prices. In these theories, some investors’ extrapolative
beliefs  generate  temporary  deviations  of  prices  from  the  level  war-
ranted by fundamentals, and the predictability of asset returns arises
as  a  result.  Aside  from  its  direct  contribution  to  the  extrapolation
literature, we take our methodological and empirical contribution as
the first step toward a new stream of literature that tests behavioral
theories of asset prices without relying solely on survey data or data
on investor behavior. We demonstrate that by imposing a theory-based
structure on the belief formation process of interest, one can recover
evidence and variation in biases purely from prices. We believe our
proposed  methodological  shift  unlocks  many  promising  avenues  for
future research in behavioral finance.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Stefano Cassella: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization. Te-Feng  Chen: Writing  –
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptual-
ization. Huseyin Gulen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Yan Liu: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A.  Model derivation and estimation

A.1.  Model derivation

We derive (19) in this section. Note

(𝐼4 − 𝜌𝛤 )−1 =

1 − 𝜌𝜌𝜇
0 
−𝛽𝑆 𝜌𝜆𝜇
0 

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

0 
1 − 𝜌𝜌𝑔
−𝛽𝑆 𝜆𝑔
−𝜌𝛽𝑤

0
0
1 − 𝜌(1 − 𝛽𝑆 (1 − 𝜆𝑆 )) 
0 

−1
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

.

−𝛽𝑆 𝜌𝜆𝑤
1 − 𝜌(1 − 𝛽𝑤)

We calculate [−𝜆𝜇, 1 −𝜆𝑔, −𝜆𝑆 , −𝜆𝑤](𝐼4 −𝜌𝛤 )−1 to obtain the loadings

with respect to the state variables (denoted as 𝐿1, 𝐿2, 𝐿3, and 𝐿4):
𝐿1 = −

−𝛽𝑆

) ((𝜆𝑔 − 1
) (𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆

) (
)
(𝜆𝑆 − 1

)
−𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆 + 1
− 1

)

+ 𝜌𝛽𝑆 𝜆𝑆

)

,

𝜆𝜇
(1 − 𝜌𝜌𝜇)
𝜌𝛽𝑤𝜆𝑤

(𝜌 + 𝜌 (

)
)
(𝜌 + 𝜌 (
− 1
(𝜆𝑆 − 1
)
(𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆
− 1
)
(
)
−𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑤 + 1
− 1
−𝛽𝑆
−
) (
(𝜌𝜌𝑔 − 1
−𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑤 + 1

) ,

𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆

𝜆𝑆
)
(𝜆𝑆 − 1
(
𝜆𝑤
(
−𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑤 + 1

, and

− 1
)
−𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆 + 1
) (𝜌 + 𝜌𝛽𝑆
(𝜆𝑆 − 1

)

) .

− 1

𝐿2 =

𝐿3 =

𝐿4 =

Using the Eqs. (12) and (13), we confirm that 𝐿1 =  −𝐵𝜇, 𝐿2 = 𝐵𝑔,
𝐿3 = 𝐵𝑆 , and 𝐿4 = 𝐵𝑤.

13 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Fig. 1.  Impulse Response. We plot the impulse response functions for both the state variables ( ̂𝑆𝑡,
̂𝑤𝑡, ̂𝜇𝑡, and ̂𝑔𝑡) and the model-implied quantities (̂𝑝𝑑𝑡, 𝐸𝑡(̂𝑟𝑡+1), and ̂𝑟𝑡) following
a one-standard-deviation shock in one of the state variables at time 0. The response variables are standardized. Year 1 in the figure represents one period after the initial shock.

A.2.  Model estimation

where the covariance matrix for the shocks 𝛴 is taken to be a diagonal
matrix:

Given the state-space representation given in (20) and (21), we first

write down the Kalman iteration as:
𝐹00 = 06×1,
𝑃00 = 𝐸[𝐹𝑡𝐹 ′
𝑡 ],
𝐹𝑡𝑡−1 = 𝛤𝐹 𝐹𝑡−1𝑡−1 + 𝛤𝑈 𝑈𝑡,
𝑃𝑡𝑡−1 = 𝛤𝐹 𝑃𝑡−1𝑡−1𝛤 ′

𝐹 + 𝛷𝐹 𝛴 𝛷′
𝐹 ,
𝜉𝑡 = 𝑌𝑡 − 𝐺𝑌 𝑌𝑡−1 − 𝐺𝐹 𝐹𝑡𝑡−1,
𝑆𝑡 = 𝐺𝐹 𝑃𝑡𝑡−1𝐺′
𝐹 ,
𝐾𝑡 = 𝑃𝑡𝑡−1𝐺′
𝐹 𝑆−1
𝑡
𝐹𝑡𝑡 = 𝐹𝑡𝑡−1 + 𝐾𝑡𝜉𝑡,
𝑃𝑡𝑡 = (𝐼6×6 − 𝐾𝑡𝐺𝐹 )𝑃𝑡𝑡−1,

,

𝛴 = diag([𝜎2

𝑑 , 𝜎2

𝑔 , 𝜎2

𝜇]′)

.

The log likelihood function based on the prediction errors (𝜉𝑡) is

given by:
𝑇
∑

𝐿 = −

𝑡=1

log(det (𝑆𝑡)) −

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝑡 𝑆−1
𝜉′

𝑡 𝜉𝑡.

Our goal for the estimation is to maximize the log likelihood func-
tion  numerically.  We  achieve  this  by  taking  several  steps.  First,  we
demean  all  variables  to  achieve  model  parsimony  and  perform  the
model estimation only to the demeaned state-space system as given in
(20) and (21). Second, for the numerical search, we use simulated an-
nealing (SA) to estimate the baseline model. We then use the parameter

14 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Fig. 2.  Extrapolative Beliefs, Surveys, and Prices. Panel A compares our filtered time-series of return extrapolation (𝑆, left) and cash-flow extrapolation (𝑤, right) with survey
expectations of future returns (SURVEYS𝑅𝐸 𝑇 ) and expectations of future long-term earnings growth (SURVEY𝐶 𝐹 ), respectively. Panel B repeats the comparison, but uses only the
extrapolative component of survey expectations (SURVEYS𝑋
𝐶 𝐹 ). For return expectations, we obtain such a component following the procedure in Greenwood and
Shleifer (2014). For cash-flow expectations, we rely on the metric of investors’ experiences of past growth with fading memory from Nagel and Xu (2022). Panel C overlays our
two time series of investor extrapolative expectations with the price–dividend ratio of the market. More details are in Section 3.

𝑅𝐸 𝑇 and SURVEY𝑋

estimates from the baseline model as starting values to re-optimize the
objective function under our extended model.

Appendix C.  Alternative  structural  models  of  extrapolation  and
the present-value relation

Let  us  call  the  above  estimation  procedure  the  sequential  search
method (SSM) to estimate the parameters for a state-space represen-
tation. The final solution is given by the solution that generates the
largest value for the objective function. We then set the starting values
at their unconditional means (i.e., zeros for the demeaned variables)
and simulate the normally distributed innovations, generating 1,000
artificial data sets. For each set, we perform model estimation to obtain
the  corresponding  set  of  parameter  estimates.  We  summarize  across
these 1,000 sets of estimates to provide standard error estimates.

See Table A3.1.

Appendix D.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103986.

Data availability

Appendix B.  Extrapolative and predictability: alternative controls

Extracting Extrapolative Beliefs from Market Prices: An Augmented Pr
esent-Value Approach (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

See Table A2.1.

15 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Table 1
Model estimates.

Parameters

Panel A: Parameter Estimates
𝜌𝜇

𝜌𝑔

𝛽𝑆

𝐵𝑆

𝛽𝑤

𝐵𝑤

𝜎𝑑

𝜎𝑔

𝜎𝜇
Panel B: Derived Parameters
𝐵𝜇

𝐵𝑔

𝜆𝜇

𝜆𝑔

𝜆𝑆

𝜆𝑤
Panel C: Variance of the pd ratio - counterfactual scenarios

Estimate

Stderr.

0.9068

0.1786

0.4639

0.1000

0.0004

232.70

0.0289

0.0550

0.0179

8.4440

1.2101

1.0473

0.0962

(0.0013)

(0.0503)

(0.0250)

(0.0238)

(0.0004)

(40.80)

(0.0118)

(0.0057)

(0.0015)

(0.4124)

(0.0678)

(0.0136)

(0.0489)

−0.0502

(0.0149)

−6.8824

(2.1935)

1 − 𝜎2 (̃𝑝𝑑)
𝜎2 (̂𝑝𝑑)

0.9751

Scenario
𝐵𝜇 = 0
𝐵𝑔 = 0
𝐵𝑆 = 0
𝐵𝑤 = 0
We estimate our model as described by the state-space representation given in (20) and (21). Details for
the model estimation are explained in Appendix A1. Panel A reports the primitive parameters. Panel B
reports the derived parameters that can be written as functions of the primitive parameters. Standard errors
(‘‘Stderr’’) are provided in the parenthesis. Based on our model parameters, Panel C reports by how much
the variance of the price–dividend ratio would decline in the event we shut down any of the four drivers
of the pd ratio in our model. We measure such a reduction as one minus the ratio of variance of the pd
ratio in the counterfactual scenario (𝜎2(̃𝑝𝑑)) over the variance of the price–dividend ratio observed in the
data (𝜎2(̂𝑝𝑑)). More details are in Section 2.5.1

0.0000

0.0343

0.1897

16 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Table 2
Extrapolative expectations: Pairwise correlations.
S

w

𝜇

g

AAII

II

GALLUP

SURVEYS𝑅𝐸 𝑇

SURVEYS𝑋

𝑅𝐸 𝑇

SURVEY𝐶 𝐹

SURVEY𝑋
𝐶 𝐹

scr

cay

dfy

g

w

S

AAII

II

GALLUP

SURVEYS𝑅𝐸 𝑇

SURVEYS𝑋

𝑅𝐸 𝑇

SURVEY𝐶 𝐹

SURVEY𝑋
𝐶 𝐹

scr

cay

dfy

−0.27
(0.02)
−0.74
(0.01)
0.05
(0.65)
−0.56
(0.01)
−0.39
(0.01)
−0.64
(0.05)
−0.4
(0.01)
−0.11
(0.36)
−0.73
(0.01)
−0.35
(0.01)
0.34
(0.01)
0.02
(0.86)
0.08
(0.48)
−0.25
(0.03)

0.22
(0.05)
0.83
(0.01)
0.40
(0.02)
0.45
(0.01)
0.91
(0.01)
0.47
(0.01)
0.75
(0.01)
0.11
(0.5)
0.14
(0.23)
−0.19
(0.09)
0.05
(0.64)
−0.42
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.92)

−0.06
(0.63)
0.26
(0.14)
0.45
(0.01)
0.68
(0.03)
0.42
(0.01)
0.06
(0.59)
0.59
(0.01)
0.46
(0.01)
−0.61
(0.01)
−0.20
(0.09)
−0.2
(0.08)
0.09
(0.45)

0.14
(0.41)
0.23
(0.09)
0.85
(0.01)
0.25
(0.06)
0.69
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.94)
0.05
(0.69)
−0.05
(0.68)
0.11
(0.34)
−0.46
(0.01)
−0.19
(0.1)

0.59
(0.01)
0.74
(0.01)
0.73
(0.01)
0.55
(0.01)
0.07
(0.69)
−0.15
(0.39)
−0.05
(0.79)
0.03
(0.88)
−0.37
(0.03)
0.32
(0.06)

0.81
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
0.43
(0.01)
0.23
(0.19)
0.12
(0.38)
−0.22
(0.11)
−0.06
(0.64)
−0.26
(0.05)
0.28
(0.03)

0.93
(0.01)
0.97
(0.01)
0.43
(0.21)
0.06
(0.87)
0.25
(0.49)
0.18
(0.62)
−0.88
(0.01)
−0.12
(0.74)

0.47
(0.01)
0.36
(0.04)
0.1
(0.48)
−0.15
(0.27)
−0.03
(0.82)
−0.29
(0.03)
0.3
(0.03)

0.08
(0.64)
−0.14
(0.22)
−0.16
(0.17)
−0.07
(0.53)
−0.35
(0.01)
0.02
(0.85)

0.27
(0.1)
−0.04
(0.79)
−0.24
(0.15)
−0.27
(0.1)
−0.24
(0.15)

−0.08
(0.52)
0.04
(0.73)
−0.11
(0.36)
−0.37
(0.01)

0.36
(0.01)
−0.06
(0.58)
−0.23
(0.05)

−0.05
(0.69)
0.19
(0.11)

tms

0.21
(0.07)
Pairwise correlations between return-extrapolative expectations (𝑆), the discount rate (𝜇), expected dividend growth (𝑔), cash-flow extrapolative expectations, 𝑤 and the following
time-series:  (i)  survey  expectations  of  stock  returns  (AAII,  Gallup,  II);  (ii)  a  linear  combination  of  survey  expectations  of  stock  returns  (SURVEYS𝑅𝐸 𝑇 )  and  its  extrapolative
𝐶 𝐹 ), from Nagel and Xu (2022));
component (SURVEYS𝑋
(iv) macroeconomic variables such as the term spread (tms), the default yield spread (dfy), the surplus-consumption ratio (scr, Campbell and Cochrane 1999) and the aggregate
consumption-wealth ratio (cay, Lettau and Ludvigson 2001).

𝑅𝐸 𝑇 ); (iii) survey expectations of fundamentals (SURVEY𝐶 𝐹 ) and survey cash-flow expectations with fading memory (SURVEY𝑋

Table 3
Simulation analysis.
𝛽𝑆
𝛽𝑤
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝜇𝐸 𝑠𝑡, 𝜇𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑒)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑔𝐸 𝑠𝑡, 𝑔𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑒)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑆 𝐸 𝑠𝑡, 𝑆 𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑒)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑤𝐸 𝑠𝑡, 𝑤𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑒)

True
True

0.200
0.010

0.100

0.200

0.300
0.010

0.100

0.200

0.400
0.010

0.100

0.200

Data

0.773
0.840
0.693
0.701
0.881
0.917
0.992
0.995

0.901
0.937
0.703
0.711
0.801
0.806
0.793
0.874

0.714
0.776
0.693
0.710
0.861
0.893
0.979
0.988

Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Mean
Median

0.908
0.961
0.938
0.972
0.699
0.885
0.712
0.890
0.781
0.733
0.805
0.727
0.816
0.726
0.891
0.818
We investigate the ability of our approach to recover the four latent processes in our model via a simulation analysis. Each cell in the table refers to a summary statistic obtained
from a sample of 500 simulations pertaining a given set of underlying model parameters {𝛽𝑆 , 𝛽𝑤 }. The table shows the mean and the median pairwise-correlation across simulations
between each estimated time-series and the underlying latent process created as part of the simulation. Throughout the table, we refer to the artificial latent process created as
part of the simulation with a superscript ‘‘True’’ (e.g., 𝑤𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑒 refers to the latent process for cash-flow extrapolation that is imposed as part of the simulation setup), whereas we
use the superscript ‘‘Est’’ to indicate the filtered time-series that is recovered by our econometric approach. In the column labeled ‘‘Data’’, we perform simulations that are based
on the exact model parameters estimated from the data in Table 1. We also repeat the analysis for several combinations of the structural parameters governing extrapolation 𝛽𝑆
and 𝛽𝑤 as reported. In all these simulations, the shocks used to generate the simulated processes are assumed to have a 1% standard deviation. All other model parameters are
set to resemble the model parameters estimated in the data: 𝜌𝜇 = 0.9, 𝜌𝑔 = 0.2, 𝐵𝑆 = 0.1, 𝐵𝑤 = 200. More details on the simulation setup are in Section 3.1.

0.739
0.784
0.696
0.705
0.857
0.887
0.981
0.990

0.768
0.827
0.684
0.711
0.903
0.937
0.990
0.994

0.896
0.940
0.701
0.712
0.742
0.784
0.804
0.878

0.735
0.784
0.699
0.707
0.887
0.934
0.980
0.987

0.782
0.827
0.698
0.714
0.925
0.953
0.992
0.995

17 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Table 4
Extrapolative expectations and return predictability.

(1)

0.049
[−0.02,0.12]
(0.21)
−0.016
[−0.08,0.06]
(0.67)

0.50
(n.a.)

76
No

0.042
[0.01,0.08]
(0.03)
−0.021
[−0.05,0.02]
(0.23)

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value

N
Controls

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value

7.38
(n.a.)

0.040
[0.02,0.06]
(0.00)
−0.015
[−0.03,0.00]
(0.08)

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value

25.68
(n.a.)

Surveys

(2)

(3)

(4)
Panel A: h = 3

Structural

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.044
[−0.04,0.12]
(0.27)
0.048
[−0.10,0.18]
(0.51)
−0.078
[−0.21,0.06]
(0.10)
−0.052
[−0.13,0.02]
(0.06)
1.77
(0.46)

−0.012
[−0.13,0.11]
(0.86)
0.034
[−0.10,0.17]
(0.62)
−0.074
[−0.21,0.06]
(0.13)
−0.042
[−0.12,0.03]
(0.14)
2.09
(0.84)

76
No

76
PC1
Panel B: h = 12

0.053
[0.01,0.09]
(0.01)
0.038
[−0.03,0.11]
(0.28)
−0.067
[−0.14,−0.00]
(0.03)
−0.005
[−0.04,0.03]
(0.39)
9.30
(0.09)

0.058
[−0.01,0.12]
(0.07)
0.039
[−0.03,0.11]
(0.27)
−0.067
[−0.14,0.00]
(0.03)
−0.006
[−0.04,0.03]
(0.36)
8.04
(0.13)

Panel C: h = 36

0.038
[0.02,0.06]
(0.00)
0.009
[−0.02,0.04]
(0.49)
−0.030
[−0.06,−0.00]
(0.02)
−0.021
[−0.04,0.00]
(0.03)
31.45
(0.03)

0.044
[0.01,0.08]
(0.01)
0.011
[−0.02,0.04]
(0.47)
−0.031
[−0.06,−0.00]
(0.02)
−0.022
[−0.04,−0.00]
(0.03)
30.73
(0.03)

−0.040
[−0.11,0.03]
(0.13)
−0.064
[−0.14,0.01]
(0.03)
2.87
(0.09)

76
No

−0.039
[−0.07,0.00]
(0.01)
−0.021
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.11)
4.08
(0.05)

−0.025
[−0.04,−0.01]
(0.00)
−0.034
[−0.06,−0.01]
(0.00)
18.58
(0.00)

−0.005
[−0.10,0.10]
(0.94)
0.072
[−0.07,0.20]
(0.31)
−0.094
[−0.22,0.04]
(0.08)
−0.111
[−0.21,−0.01]
(0.02)
5.20
(0.06)

76
No

0.029
[−0.03,0.09]
(0.29)
0.033
[−0.04,0.11]
(0.37)
−0.059
[−0.14,0.02]
(0.06)
−0.041
[−0.10,0.01]
(0.06)
10.22
(0.07)

0.025
[−0.01,0.06]
(0.17)
0.002
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.91)
−0.019
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.16)
−0.028
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.05)
28.90
(0.20)

−0.036
[−0.16,0.10]
(0.63)
0.055
[−0.09,0.20]
(0.48)
−0.083
[−0.22,0.07]
(0.11)
−0.100
[−0.21,0.01]
(0.04)
4.45
(0.12)

76
PC1

0.049
[−0.02,0.12]
(0.17)
0.044
[−0.04,0.12]
(0.26)
−0.066
[−0.14,0.01]
(0.04)
−0.049
[−0.11,0.01]
(0.04)
9.80
(0.05)

0.034
[−0.01,0.07]
(0.11)
0.007
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.69)
−0.022
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.12)
−0.031
[−0.06,0.00]
(0.03)
28.45
(0.12)

−0.033
[−0.10,0.03]
(0.16)
−0.088
[−0.15,−0.02]
(0.00)
6.35
(0.02)

76
No

−0.031
[−0.06,0.00]
(0.03)
−0.054
[−0.09,−0.02]
(0.00)
11.01
(0.00)

−0.017
[−0.04,0.01]
(0.05)
−0.046
[−0.07,−0.02]
(0.00)
27.20
(0.00)

76
No

N
Controls
We regress future annualized h-month cumulative log returns of the value-weighted stock market on lagged discount rate (𝜇), expected dividend growth (𝑔), return extrapolative
expectations (𝑆), and cash-flow extrapolative expectations (𝑤). We also construct the first principal component of these predictors, and use it as the control in columns 4 and 7. As
indicated in each panel, the analysis involving return extrapolation (S) and cash-flow extrapolation (w) is performed both using surveys and using our own structurally estimated
belief time-series. The table reports coefficient estimates, as well as 95% confidence intervals (CI) and two-sided and one-sided 𝑝-values as indicated. Whenever applicable, we also
report the 𝑝-value from a F-test of the joint hypothesis of no predictability by return extrapolation and cash-flow extrapolation.

76
PC1

76
PC1

76
No

76
No

76
No

76
No

18 

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Table 5
Out-of-Sample Return Predictability.

FS
OOS

FS
OOS

FS

OOS

FS

OOS

𝑀1vs𝑀0

7.71%
3.16%

10.31%
3.58%

𝑀1vs𝑀0

0.0045
[1.83]
0.0046
[1.58]

0.0068
[1.49]
0.0045
[0.99]

Panel A: OOS 𝑅2

OOS start = 1973

OOS start = 1998

Surveys

𝑀2vs𝑀0

8.57%
4.76%

11.22%
6.13%

𝑀2vs𝑀1

0.93%
1.65%

1.01%
2.65%

Panel B: CW (2007) statistic

OOS start = 1973

OOS start = 1998

Surveys

𝑀2vs𝑀0

0.0051
[1.93]
0.0052
[1.78]

0.0075
[1.56]
0.0056
[1.23]

Structural

𝑀2vs𝑀0

8.41%
4.41%

11.10%
5.91%

Structural

𝑀2vs𝑀0

0.0051
[1.93]
0.0054
[1.77]

0.0076
[1.57]
0.0058
[1.24]

𝑀2vs𝑀1

0.76%
1.29%

0.88%
2.42%

̂𝑆𝑡 + 𝜆𝑤 ̂𝑤𝑡) + 𝜖2(𝑡+1)

We consider three return predictability models:
𝑀0 ∶ 𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝑎 + 𝜖0(𝑡+1)
𝑀1 ∶ 𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝑎 + 𝑏(𝜆𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜆𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡) + 𝜖1(𝑡+1)
𝑀2 ∶ 𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝑎 + 𝑏(𝜆𝜇 ̂𝜇𝑡 + 𝜆𝑔 ̂𝑔𝑡 + 𝜆𝑆
where 𝜇𝑡, 𝑔𝑡, 𝑆𝑡, and 𝑤𝑡 are respectively the filtered time series of the discount rate, the expected dividend growth, and extrapolative return
and cash-flow expectations; 𝜆𝜇, 𝜆𝑔 , 𝜆𝑆 , and 𝜆𝑤 are the loadings of the conditional return on the filtered variables obtained from the structural
model. In Panel A, we perform pairwise comparisons of the out-of-sample performance of these models based on Campbell and Thompson
(2008) out-of-sample 𝑅2 statistic. In Panel B, the pairwise comparison is based on Clark and West (2007) test of equal out-of-sample forecasting
accuracy for nested models. The out-of-sample analysis is based on two out-of-sample starting dates. The analysis is conducted using two versions
of the filtered time-series (both use our model parameter estimates based on the full sample). FS refers to full-sample filtering, whereas OOS
refers to progressive filtering that only relies on information up to 𝑡 to filter out the time-𝑡 state variables. More details are in Section 3.4.

19 

S. Cassella et al.

Table A2.1
Alternative controls.

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value
N
Controls

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value
N
Controls

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value
N
Controls

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value
N
Controls

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A: h = 3
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

−0.008
[−0.11,0.11]
(0.89)
0.072
[−0.07,0.21]
(0.33)
−0.104
[−0.24,0.04]
(0.08)
−0.119
[−0.22,−0.02]
(0.01)
4.23
(0.05)
76
dfy

0.010
[−0.09,0.12]
(0.84)
0.088
[−0.05,0.23]
(0.23)
−0.115
[−0.26,0.02]
(0.05)
−0.125
[−0.22,−0.03]
(0.01)
6.99
(0.02)
76
infl

−0.003
[−0.10,0.10]
(0.97)
0.076
[−0.07,0.22]
(0.29)
−0.092
[−0.23,0.05]
(0.09)
−0.112
[−0.21,−0.01]
(0.01)
3.93
(0.06)
76
svar

0.000
[−0.12,0.10]
(0.99)
0.039
[−0.11,0.18]
(0.59)
−0.077
[−0.21,0.06]
(0.13)
−0.109
[−0.21,−0.02]
(0.02)
5.33
(0.09)
76
de

−0.106
[−0.24,0.04]
(0.13)
0.092
[−0.05,0.23]
(0.19)
−0.114
[−0.25,0.02]
(0.05)
−0.280
[−0.46,−0.10]
(0.00)
9.52
(0.00)
76
lty

0.006
[−0.11,0.10]
(0.92)
0.060
[−0.09,0.19]
(0.42)
−0.078
[−0.21,0.06]
(0.12)
−0.103
[−0.21,−0.00]
(0.03)
4.92
(0.12)
76
tms

−0.059
[−0.18,0.05]
(0.31)
0.069
[−0.07,0.20]
(0.34)
−0.084
[−0.21,0.05]
(0.10)
−0.215
[−0.35,−0.08]
(0.00)
9.26
(0.00)
76
tbl

0.007
[−0.10,0.12]
(0.91)
0.072
[−0.07,0.22]
(0.33)
−0.092
[−0.24,0.05]
(0.11)
−0.100
[−0.21,0.00]
(0.03)
4.61
(0.10)
76
ltr

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

−0.044
[−0.19,0.10]
(0.54)
0.052
[−0.10,0.20]
(0.45)
−0.082
[−0.22,0.06]
(0.12)
−0.098
[−0.20,0.00]
(0.03)
4.62
(0.12)
76
ep

0.055
[−0.09,0.20]
(0.46)
0.088
[−0.05,0.22]
(0.24)
−0.121
[−0.26,0.02]
(0.05)
−0.139
[−0.25,−0.03]
(0.01)
5.50
(0.02)
76
bm

−0.032
[−0.14,0.08]
(0.57)
0.061
[−0.08,0.20]
(0.40)
−0.083
[−0.22,0.05]
(0.12)
−0.129
[−0.23,−0.02]
(0.01)
5.86
(0.05)
75
ik

−0.003
[−0.10,0.10]
(0.96)
0.064
[−0.09,0.20]
(0.34)
−0.082
[−0.21,0.05]
(0.11)
−0.121
[−0.21,−0.02]
(0.01)
5.74
(0.06)
76
ntis

0.025
[−0.08,0.13]
(0.63)
0.024
[−0.12,0.17]
(0.75)
−0.048
[−0.19,0.09]
(0.25)
−0.125
[−0.22,−0.03]
(0.01)
11.34
(0.09)
76
eqis
Panel B: h = 12
(5)

−0.007
[−0.11,0.10]
(0.90)
0.071
[−0.08,0.21]
(0.33)
−0.092
[−0.23,0.05]
(0.08)
−0.114
[−0.21,−0.01]
(0.01)
3.93
(0.06)
76
cay

−0.004
[−0.11,0.10]
(0.94)
0.073
[−0.08,0.21]
(0.35)
−0.095
[−0.22,0.04]
(0.10)
−0.111
[−0.21,−0.01]
(0.01)
3.85
(0.06)
76
dfr

(6)

(7)

(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.031
[−0.02,0.09]
(0.25)
0.033
[−0.05,0.10]
(0.35)
−0.054
[−0.13,0.02]
(0.06)
−0.037
[−0.09,0.02]
(0.07)
9.27
(0.13)
76
dfy

0.041
[−0.02,0.09]
(0.11)
0.046
[−0.02,0.11]
(0.19)
−0.076
[−0.14,−0.01]
(0.01)
−0.052
[−0.11,−0.00]
(0.03)
15.91
(0.02)
76
infl

0.036
[−0.02,0.09]
(0.21)
0.045
[−0.03,0.12]
(0.25)
−0.054
[−0.12,0.01]
(0.06)
−0.045
[−0.09,0.01]
(0.04)
12.04
(0.08)
76
svar

0.028
[−0.03,0.08]
(0.29)
0.039
[−0.04,0.11]
(0.33)
−0.062
[−0.13,0.02]
(0.04)
−0.042
[−0.09,0.01]
(0.05)
9.08
(0.07)
76
de

−0.035
[−0.11,0.04]
(0.32)
0.046
[−0.03,0.11]
(0.18)
−0.072
[−0.14,−0.00]
(0.02)
−0.148
[−0.24,−0.06]
(0.00)
16.88
(0.00)
76
lty

0.034
[−0.02,0.09]
(0.22)
0.028
[−0.05,0.10]
(0.46)
−0.052
[−0.12,0.02]
(0.07)
−0.038
[−0.09,0.02]
(0.08)
9.64
(0.13)
76
tms

−0.002
[−0.06,0.06]
(0.94)
0.031
[−0.05,0.10]
(0.37)
−0.054
[−0.12,0.02]
(0.05)
−0.101
[−0.17,−0.03]
(0.01)
15.23
(0.01)
76
tbl

0.037
[−0.02,0.10]
(0.21)
0.033
[−0.04,0.11]
(0.38)
−0.058
[−0.13,0.01]
(0.06)
−0.034
[−0.09,0.02]
(0.12)
10.15
(0.11)
76
ltr

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

0.041
[−0.03,0.12]
(0.27)
0.040
[−0.04,0.11]
(0.30)
−0.063
[−0.13,0.01]
(0.04)
−0.045
[−0.10,0.01]
(0.04)
9.21
(0.06)
76
ep

0.082
[0.01,0.16]
(0.03)
0.048
[−0.02,0.12]
(0.20)
−0.084
[−0.16,−0.01]
(0.02)
−0.066
[−0.13,−0.01]
(0.01)
13.57
(0.01)
76
bm

0.011
[−0.04,0.07]
(0.72)
0.026
[−0.04,0.09]
(0.48)
−0.052
[−0.12,0.02]
(0.07)
−0.053
[−0.10,0.01]
(0.02)
12.75
(0.08)
75
ik

0.030
[−0.02,0.08]
(0.27)
0.031
[−0.04,0.10]
(0.43)
−0.055
[−0.12,0.02]
(0.05)
−0.045
[−0.10,0.00]
(0.05)
9.62
(0.08)
76
ntis

20 

0.047
[−0.01,0.10]
(0.08)
0.004
[−0.06,0.07]
(0.90)
−0.031
[−0.10,0.04]
(0.19)
−0.050
[−0.10,−0.00]
(0.03)
18.90
(0.16)
76
eqis

0.031
[−0.03,0.09]
(0.28)
0.034
[−0.04,0.11]
(0.34)
−0.061
[−0.14,0.00]
(0.04)
−0.038
[−0.09,0.02]
(0.07)
9.34
(0.09)
76
cay

0.030
[−0.03,0.09]
(0.26)
0.036
[−0.05,0.10]
(0.35)
−0.061
[−0.13,0.02]
(0.03)
−0.041
[−0.10,0.01]
(0.06)
9.00
(0.07)
76
dfr

(continued on next page)

S. Cassella et al.

Table A2.1 (continued).

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value
N
Controls

𝜇

𝑔

𝑆

𝑤

CI
𝑝-value

CI
𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

CI
1sided 𝑝-value

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Panel C: h = 36
(1)

(2)

0.024
[−0.01,0.06]
(0.20)
0.002
[−0.04,0.04]
(0.89)
−0.023
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.10)
−0.031
[−0.07,0.00]
(0.04)
28.59
(0.13)
76
dfy

0.031
[−0.00,0.06]
(0.06)
0.009
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.63)
−0.027
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.08)
−0.033
[−0.07,−0.00]
(0.03)
34.28
(0.06)
76
infl

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.026
[−0.01,0.06]
(0.16)
0.003
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.87)
−0.019
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.19)
−0.028
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.05)
27.92
(0.19)
76
svar

0.026
[−0.01,0.06]
(0.15)
0.000
[−0.03,0.03]
(0.99)
−0.018
[−0.05,0.02]
(0.18)
−0.028
[−0.06,0.00]
(0.05)
27.97
(0.20)
76
de

−0.002
[−0.04,0.04]
(0.94)
0.008
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.66)
−0.024
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.10)
−0.073
[−0.13,−0.01]
(0.01)
32.84
(0.01)
76
lty

0.030
[−0.00,0.06]
(0.08)
−0.004
[−0.04,0.03]
(0.84)
−0.011
[−0.05,0.03]
(0.27)
−0.024
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.09)
31.18
(0.34)
76
tms

0.007
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.68)
0.001
[−0.04,0.04]
(0.95)
−0.016
[−0.05,0.02]
(0.20)
−0.063
[−0.10,−0.02]
(0.00)
35.23
(0.01)
76
tbl

0.029
[−0.01,0.06]
(0.09)
0.002
[−0.04,0.04]
(0.90)
−0.018
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.20)
−0.025
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.08)
28.77
(0.26)
76
ltr

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

0.025
[−0.02,0.06]
(0.24)
0.002
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.91)
−0.019
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.16)
−0.028
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.06)
27.89
(0.20)
76
ep

0.076
[0.04,0.12]
(0.00)
0.016
[−0.02,0.05]
(0.33)
−0.042
[−0.08,−0.01]
(0.01)
−0.052
[−0.09,−0.02]
(0.00)
42.54
(0.00)
76
bm

0.015
[−0.02,0.05]
(0.44)
−0.002
[−0.04,0.03]
(0.91)
−0.015
[−0.05,0.02]
(0.25)
−0.035
[−0.07,0.00]
(0.03)
32.29
(0.13)
75
ik

0.026
[−0.01,0.06]
(0.14)
0.000
[−0.04,0.04]
(1.00)
−0.015
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.22)
−0.031
[−0.07,0.00]
(0.04)
29.66
(0.18)
76
ntis

0.033
[0.00,0.07]
(0.05)
−0.010
[−0.05,0.03]
(0.56)
−0.006
[−0.04,0.04]
(0.39)
−0.032
[−0.06,0.00]
(0.02)
34.58
(0.19)
76
eqis

0.031
[−0.00,0.06]
(0.06)
0.004
[−0.03,0.04]
(0.81)
−0.023
[−0.06,0.01]
(0.11)
−0.019
[−0.05,0.01]
(0.12)
37.10
(0.21)
76
cay

0.025
[−0.01,0.06]
(0.15)
0.003
[−0.03,0.05]
(0.88)
−0.019
[−0.06,0.02]
(0.17)
−0.028
[−0.06,0.00]
(0.05)
27.90
(0.19)
76
dfr

𝐴𝑑 𝑗 .𝑅2 (%)
𝐹 -test 𝑝-value
N
Controls
Predictive regressions of aggregate future log market returns.

Table A3.1
Alternative structural models of extrapolation and the present-value relation: Correlation analysis.

Main Model w/CCE

Model 𝑀𝑍

Main Model w/CCE

Model 𝑀𝑍

Panel A: Cashflow Extrapolation
Main Model
0.992
(0.01)
0.999
(0.01)

Panel B: Return Extrapolation
Main Model
0.995
(0.01)
0.999
(0.01)

Main Model w/ CCE

0.992
(0.01)

Main Model w/ CCE

0.995
(0.01)

Pairwise correlations between the measures of extrapolations obtained in: (i) the main model of Section
2; (ii) a modified model that allows for cross-correlations between the shocks in the model (Main Model
w/ CCE, Section 4); and (iii) an extended model that allows to incorporate observable proxies for risk-
preferences in the discount-rate dynamics (Model 𝑀𝑍 , Section 4 and Appendix IA1). Panel A focuses on
cashflow extrapolation, Panel B focuses on return extrapolation.

References

Barberis, N., Thaler, R., 2005. A Survey of Behavioral Finance. Princeton University

Amromin, G., Sharpe, S.A., 2014. From the horse’s mouth: Economic conditions and

investor expectations of risk and return. Manage. Sci. 60 (4), 845–866.

Atmaz, A., Gulen, H., Cassella, S., Ruan, F., 2024. Contrarians, extrapolators, and stock

market momentum and reversal. Manage. Sci. 70 (9), 1509–5949.

Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset

pricing puzzles. J. Finance 59 (4), 1481–1509.

Barberis,  N.,  2018.  Psychology-based  models  of  asset  prices  and  trading  volume.
In: Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, vol. 1,
Elsevier, pp. 79–175.

Barberis,  N.,  Greenwood,  R.,  Jin,  L.,  Shleifer,  A.,  2015.  X-CAPM:  An  extrapolative

capital asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 115 (1), 1–24.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment. J. Financ.

Econ. 49 (3), 307–343.

21 

Press.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., La Porta, R., Shleifer, A., 2024. Belief overreaction and stock

market puzzles. J. Policital Econ. 132 (5), 1450–1484.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Porta, R.L., Shleifer, A., 2019. Diagnostic expectations and

stock returns. J. Finance 74 (6), 2839–2874.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2018. Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles.

J. Finance 73 (1), 199–227.

Campbell,  J.Y.,  Cochrane,  J.H.,  1999.  By  force  of  habit:  A  consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 107 (2), 205–251.
Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future

dividends and discount factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1 (3), 195–228.

Campbell, J.Y., Thompson, S.B., 2008. Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
Can anything beat the historical average? Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (4), 1509–1531.
Cassella, S., Gulen, H., 2018. Extrapolation bias and the predictability of stock returns

by price-scaled variables. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (11), 4345–4397.

S. Cassella et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103986 

Choi, J.J., Mertens, T.M., 2019. Extrapolative expectations and the equity premium.

Jin, L.J., Sui, P., 2022. Asset pricing with return extrapolation. J. Financ. Econ. 145

Clark, T.E., West, K.D., 2007. Approximately normal tests for equal predictive accuracy

Koijen, R.S., Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. J. Polit.

(2), 273–295.

Econ. 127 (4), 1475–1515.

Available at SSRN 3462056.

in nested models. J. Econometrics 138 (1), 291–311.

Cochrane,  J.H.,  2011.  Presidential  address:  Discount  rates.  J.  Finance  66  (4),

De Bondt, W.P., 1993. Betting on trends: Intuitive forecasts of financial risk and return.

Int. J. Forecast. 9 (3), 355–371.

1047–1108.

793–805.

De la O, R., Myers, S., 2021. Subjective cash flow and discount rate expectations.
J. Finance 76 (3), 1339–1387. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13016, URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jofi.13016.

Dominitz, J., Manski, C.F., 2011. Measuring and interpreting expectations of equity

returns. J. Appl. Econometrics 26 (3), 352–370.

Lamont, O.A., 2003. Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does ‘‘Irrationality’’ disappear
with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions: Comment. NBER Macroecon.
Annu. 18, 200–207.

Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2001. Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected stock

Liu, H., Peng, C., Xiong, W.A., Xiong, W., 2022. Taming the bias zoo. J. Financ. Econ.

Ludvigson, S.C., Ng, S., 2009. Macro factors in bond risk premia. Rev. Financ. Stud.

143 (2), 716–741.

22 (12), 5027–5067.

Malmendier, U., Pouzo, D., Vanasco, V., 2020. Investor experiences and financial market

dynamics. J. Financ. Econ. 136 (3), 597–622.

De Bondt, W.F., Thaler, R., 1985. Does the stock market overreact? J. Finance 40 (3),

returns. J. Finance 56 (3), 815–849.

Fama, E.F., 1970. Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. J.

McCarthy,  O.,  Hillenbrand,  S.,  2021.  Heterogeneous  investors  and  stock  market

Finance 25 (2), 383–417.

fluctuations. Available at SSRN 3944887.

Fuster,  A.,  Hebert,  B.,  Laibson,  D.,  2012.  Natural  expectations,  macroeconomic

Nagel, S., 2012. Macroeconomic experiences and expectations: A perspective on the

dynamics, and asset pricing. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 26 (1), 1–48.

great recession. Working paper.

Gabaix, X., Koijen, R.S., 2020. In search of the origins of financial fluctuations: The

Nagel, S., Xu, Z., 2022. Asset pricing with fading memory. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (5),

inelastic markets hypothesis. Available at SSRN 3686935.

Giglio,  S.,  Maggiori,  M.,  Stroebel,  J.,  Utkus,  S.,  2021.  Five  facts  about  beliefs  and
portfolios. Amer. Econ. Rev. 111 (5), 1481–1522. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.
20200243, URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20200243.
Glaeser, E.L., Nathanson, C.G., 2017. An extrapolative model of house price dynamics.

J. Financ. Econ. 126 (1), 147–170.

2190–2245.

(3), 775–816.

Prescott,  E.C.,  1977.  Should  control  theory  be  used  for  economic  stabilization?  In:
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 7, Elsevier, pp. 13–38.
Rabin, M., 2002. Inference by believers in the law of small numbers. Q. J. Econ. 117

Sharpe,  W.F.,  1964.  Capital  asset  prices:  A  theory  of  market  equilibrium  under

Goyal, A., Welch, I., 2008. A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity

conditions of risk. J. Finance 19 (3), 425–442.

premium prediction. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (4), 1455–1508.

Shleifer, A., 2000. Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. OUP

Greenwood, R., Shleifer, A., 2014. Expectations of returns and expected returns. Rev.

Oxford.

Financ. Stud. 27 (3), 714–746.

Van  Binsbergen,  J.H.,  Koijen,  R.S.,  2010.  Predictive  regressions:  A  present-value

Hong, H., Stein, J.C., 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and

approach. J. Finance 65 (4), 1439–1471.

overreaction in asset markets. J. Finance 54 (6), 2143–2184.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2003. Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does ‘‘irrationality’’
disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions. NBER Macroecon.
Annu. 18, 139–194.

22 

