Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Household mobility and mortgage rate lock✩
Jack Liebersohn a, Jesse Rothstein b,c,d
a Department of Economics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, USA
b Goldman School of Public Policy and Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, 2607 Hearst Avenue, Berkeley, CA, 94720-7320, USA
c NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA
d California Policy Lab, 2521 Channing Way, Berkeley, CA, 94720-5555, USA

,∗

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Rising interest rates can create ‘‘mortgage rate lock’’ for homeowners with fixed rate mortgages, who can hold
onto their low rates as long as they stay in their homes but would have to take on new mortgages with higher
rates if they moved. We show mobility rates fell in 2022 and 2023 for homeowners with mortgages, as market
rates rose. We observe both absolute declines and declines relative to homeowners without mortgages, who are
unaffected by mortgage rate lock. Mobility declines are not explained by changes in home values. Overall, our
estimates imply that rising interest rates reduced mobility in 2022 and 2023 for households with mortgages
by 16% and caused $20bn of deadweight loss.

Dataset link: Data for ‘‘Household Mobility and
Mortgage Rate Lock’’ (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G21
G51
J61
R21
R23

Keywords:
Mortgages
Mobility
Interest rates
Housing lock

1.  Introduction

The  traditional  30-year,  fixed-rate,  non-assumable  mortgage  that
is used for most home purchases in the United States is an unusual
instrument. Because there are no pre-payment penalties, borrowers can
re-finance  to  take  advantage  of  declines  in  interest  rates.  Thus,  the
rate  is  in  practice  adjustable,  but  only  downward.  When  rates  rise,
borrowers are protected – the rate does not adjust up – so long as the
borrower remains in the house. However, should the original borrower
wish to move to a new house, he or she must obtain a new mortgage
at the market rate.

This feature can create a very strong disincentive to move for those
holding mortgages at rates lower than the currently prevailing rate.
Consider a homeowner who took out a fixed rate mortgage in 2016
at 3.5%, a typical rate for that year, and who still owed $200,000 as of

2023. Suppose that circumstances in her life made it desirable for her
to move to a different house of equal value, and that her credit score
was excellent, so lenders were eager to offer her a new mortgage at
the then-prevailing rate of 7%. Making the move would have increased
her monthly payment by 38%, cumulating to over $110,000 over the
remaining  life  of  the  loan.1 This  cost  could  be  avoided  entirely  by
remaining in the original house. It thus discourages mobility, and can
lead a borrower to avoid moves that would otherwise be desirable (for
example, for a new job opportunity).

Interest rates were on a long-term downward trajectory from the
early 1980s until the COVID pandemic, so this aspect of mortgages was
not empirically relevant for most homeowners for many years. How-
ever, between December 2021 and November 2022, average mortgage
rates rose from 3.10% to 6.95%, a nearly four point increase. They
continued to rise thereafter, peaking at 7.79% in October 2023. Rates

✩
Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We are grateful to Kirill Borusyak, Damon Clark, Daniel Green, Greg Howard, Jorge de la Roca, Antoinette
Schoar, Tejaswi Velayudhan, Toni Whited (editor), and Miguel Zerecero for helpful comments, as well as to seminar participants at PPIC, USC and UC Irvine. We
would like to thank Hannah Case for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Experian and the California Policy Lab for providing the data underlying
the University of California Consumer Credit Panel (UC-CCP) on which we rely.

∗ Corresponding author at: Goldman School of Public Policy and Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, 2607 Hearst Avenue, Berkeley,

CA, 94720-7320, USA.

E-mail addresses: cjlieber@uci.edu (J. Liebersohn), rothstein@berkeley.edu (J. Rothstein).

1 To hold as much constant as possible, this calculation assumes that either the new or old loan would be paid off in equal monthly payments over the 23 years

remaining of the original loan’s term. Applying a discount rate of 7%, the present value of the additional payments is $55,000.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103973
Received 27 March 2024; Received in revised form 12 November 2024; Accepted 15 November 2024
Available online 12 December 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

in 2023 were higher than at any point since 2001. We show below
that  nearly  all  mortgage  holders  in  2022  and  2023  had  rates  much
lower than would have been available to new borrowers, as even older
mortgages are likely to have been refinanced during the low-rate period
between 2009 and 2020.

We study the effect of rising interest rates on mobility. We show that
mobility rates of homeowners with mortgages have fallen dramatically
since  2021,  and  that  this  has  been  concentrated  among  mortgages
originated when rates were substantially lower. Our estimates come
from a hazard model that considers moving as a function of the gap
between a mortgage’s origination rate and the current market rate (the
‘‘rate gap’’) and other household characteristics, while controlling for
housing tenure.

Each  percentage  point  increase  in  the  currently  prevailing  rate
above a borrower’s origination rate is associated with a 7.7% decline
in the quarterly mobility probability. From 2022q3–2023q2, the last
year  we  have  data,  we  estimate  that  rate  lock  caused  between-ZIP-
code  mobility  rate  to  fall  by  16  percent,  from  7.3%  to  6.1%,  for
households with a mortgage.2 We calculate that rate lock discouraged
800,000 moves over that year. Across several specifications, the effects
on inter-state mobility are about half as large as the effects on inter-ZIP
mobility.

The change in mobility rates for homeowners without mortgages
has been much smaller. We present ‘‘difference-in-hazard’’ estimates
that identify the rate lock effect as the differential effect of rates on
homeowners  with  mortgages  and  on  a  matched  sample  of  owners
without mortgages, allowing for common time effects to control for
general equilibrium effects in the housing market. We also estimate
instrumental  variables  specifications  that  abstract  from  refinancing
decisions  by  instrumenting  for  a  household’s  current  mortgage  rate
using the prevailing mortgage rate at origination. Our estimates are
similar across specifications.

Rate lock has important financial implications for households and
for the banking system (Bolhuis et al., 2024). One effect is an effective
transfer to banks from households that moved despite rate lock. We
calculate that households who moved despite being ‘‘locked in’’ saw an
average increase in annual mortgage payments worth nearly $5000 as
a result of their moves — payments which could have been avoided
if they had been able to keep their old mortgages. The present value
of this ‘‘payment gap’’ is equal to the change in the discounted value
of future mortgage payments caused by a higher interest rate. We find
this equaled about $49,000 per mortgage in the last year of the sample,
for a total of $215bn across all moving households. Rate lock also has
economic costs in the form of the deadweight loss caused by forgone
moves,  relative  to  a  counterfactual  where  mortgages  are  assumable.
We can value these costs by considering the demand for moving as
a  function  of  the  present  value  of  mortgage  payments.  These  costs
amount to $20bn in the last year, an average of $296 per household
with a mortgage.

Previous  studies  have  documented  the  effects  of  mortgage  lock
during  earlier  periods.3 Quigley (1987, 2002)  studies  lock-in  during
the  1980s  and  1990s,  building  on  the  household  relocation  models
in Hanushek and Quigley (1978) and Venti and Wise (1984). Ferreira
et al. (2010, 2011) find substantial rate lock-in effects during the 2000s,
and also show large effects of negative home equity.

The  rapid  increase  in  rates  in  2022  and  2023  was  much  larger
than had been seen in other rising-rate episodes in recent decades, and
was largely unexpected. This provides a great deal of statistical power

2 These estimates are consistent with an elasticity of ZIP code mobility with
respect to net income between 3 and 4, or of state mobility between 1 and 2.
This is in line with other estimates that (Fajgelbaum et al., 2019) review.

3 A  large  literature  studies  the  effects  of  negative  equity  on  mobility,  a
different channel than the one we study. See Andersson and Mayock (2014),
Bernstein and Struyven (2022), Foote (2016) and Brown et al. (2019).

2 

and  a  unique  natural  experiment  with  which  to  measure  rate  lock.
We use high-frequency credit registry data, along with a strategy that
compares homeowners with mortgages to those without, to estimate
the effect of rate lock during this period on a representative population
of homeowners.4

We provide evidence that rate lock mattered more in 2022–2023
than in previous periods. This is due to the interaction of two factors.
First, gaps between rates on outstanding mortgages and market rates
are  much  larger  in  this  period;  prior  to  2022,  there  are  very  few
observations with gaps larger than about 1 percentage point. Second, in
specifications that allow for nonlinear effects of the rate gap, we find
very small effects until the rate gap exceeds about 1.5 points.5 Thus,
our estimates indicate very little effect of rate lock prior to 2022 —
an implication that is confirmed when we restrict our sample to the
pre-2022 period.

Although the current high-interest-rate regime has been in effect
for less than three years, it is already having quantitatively important
consequences for aggregate mobility rates. We show that the decline in
average moving probabilities since 2021 that is attributable to interest
rate lock sped up the secular decline in mobility rates by as much as one
year. As many previous authors (e.g. Molloy et al., 2016) have noted,
increases in moving costs and declines in mobility have the potential to
add substantial friction to the free flow of workers to job opportunities
in the labor market and slow recovery from recessions.

Interest rate lock also has consequences for lenders. Insofar as home-
owners  respond  to  interest  rate  increases  by  reducing  mobility,  this
contributes to the asymmetry between interest rate changes and time-
to-mortgage-payoff,  reducing  mortgage  payoffs  at  exactly  the  times
when  it  is  most  costly  to  the  lenders  for  the  mortgages  to  remain
outstanding.

Ours is not the only paper to study rate lock in 2022 and 2023.
Two  other  examples  are Fonseca  and  Liu (2024)  and Batzer  et  al.
(2024).6 Fonseca  and  Liu (2024)  use  credit  data  similar  to  ours,
while Batzer  et  al. (2024)  use  data  on  home  sales.  Our  work  has
several  advantages  over  these  papers.  First,  our  empirical  strategy
isolates the variation in rate lock deriving from changes in interest rates
over time, rather than from differences among mortgageholders at a
point in time in their outstanding loans’ interest rates. There are two
components of an outstanding loan’s rate, both potentially endogenous
to unobserved determinants of mobility — the date at which the loan
was originated, and the borrower’s rate relative to the market rate on
that date. The relative rate reflects, among other things, a borrower’s
creditworthiness, which may be correlated with the propensity to move.
The borrower’s origination date depends on how recently the borrower
refinanced, which may depend on the borrower’s mobility plans — a

4 Our strategy of comparing mortgage-holders to those without mortgages
builds on similar approaches taken in earlier papers, for example Aladangady
(2017) and Atalay and Edwards (2022) on housing wealth effects and Chaney
et al. (2012) on corporate investment.

5 Although our primary specifications focus on identifying the effect of pos-
itive gaps, where the market rate exceeds the outstanding rate, our nonlinear
models allow for effects of negative rate gaps as well. We find some evidence
that market rates below the outstanding mortgage rate encourage mobility.
This phenomenon is explored in greater depth in Fonseca and Liu (2024). In
their model, small negative rate gaps can dissuade moving, but larger negative
gaps simply lead to refinancing with no effect on mobility. (Note that their
model is developed in terms of the ‘‘mortgage delta’’, defined as −1 times
what we call the rate gap.)

6 Batzer et al. (2024) postdates the first circulated draft of this paper, in
September  2023.  The  original  version  of  Fonseca  and  Liu’s  paper  dates  to
March  2023,  but  that  version  uses  data  only  through  2021  and  does  not
incorporate  the  mortgage  holder-non-mortgage  holder  comparison  that  we
use and that appears in Fonseca and Liu (2024). Both Batzer et al. (2024)
and Fonseca and Liu (2024) use as their key variable the difference between
an existing mortgage’s rate and the current market rate — the opposite of what
we define as the rate gap.

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Fig. 1. Mortgage interest rates and rate gaps. Notes: Panel A shows the current 30-year FRM interest rate for originating mortgages (from the Federal Reserve’s FRED tool,
‘‘MORTGAGE30US’’ series) and quartiles of the interest rates for outstanding 30-year or less, single-family FRMs held by Fannie Mae. Data on outstanding mortgages are compiled
from the Fannie Mae Single-Family Loan Performance Data. Panel B shows the average additional monthly payment that mortgage holders would face if their mortgage payments
were recalculated using the current 30-year FRM interest rate (assigning zero payment change to any mortgage with a rate above the current rate).

household that is considering moving in the short term may not pay the
fixed costs to refinance even when this would lower the rate. Mortgage
origination dates may also be correlated with household characteristics
that  affect  migration  rates  directly,  as  we  discuss  in  Section 4.  By
contrast, our preferred estimates include origination date fixed effects
and  instrument  for  the  current  mortgage  rate  with  the  market  rate
when the original mortgage (prior to any subsequent refinancings) was
originated. This ensures that rate gap effects are identified solely from
the  natural  experiment  generated  by  the  path  of  interest  rates  after
origination.7

Second,  we  use  a  hazard  framework  with  a  nonparametric  base-
line  hazard,  rather  than  a  linear  probability  model.  This  is  useful
for examining an episode in which the key treatment (interest rates
above a mortgage’s existing rate) is strongly serially correlated. When
households are dissuaded from moving in one quarter, this affects the
duration  composition  of  outstanding  mortgages  in  the  next  quarter;
because moving rates are sharply higher for people with short tenures
in their homes, this directly affects the second quarter’s mobility rate.
The hazard model with nonparametric controls for duration is better
suited  for  this  type  of  dependence  than  are  the  linear  probability
models used in other work. The hazard framework is also important
for computing the cumulative effect of high rates over multiple quar-
ters,  without  double-counting.  We  use  it  to  calculate  counterfactual
aggregate mobility rates by quarter and to calculate total welfare losses
coming from all sources of mobility.

Beyond the methodological differences, the credit registry data we
use is more granular than what other studies have used. Because we
observe moves every quarter, we can construct event studies that trace
out  the  effects  of  rates  on  mobility  at  a  high  frequency.  The  event
study graphs help with identification because they allow us to provide

7 Fonseca  and  Liu (2024)  instrument  for  a  household’s  origination  rate
with the market rate at the time that the mortgage was originated to avoid
endogeneity coming from credit scores, but do not address endogeneity coming
from  origination  dates.  Moreover,  they  include  calendar  year  fixed  effects,
which absorb most of the variation in current market interest rates, so time
since origination is their primary source of variation. Batzer et al. (2024)’s
preferred specifications use variation in offered rates among mortgages origi-
nated at the same time and include calendar time fixed effects. They are thus
identified primarily or entirely from the two sources of variation that we see
as potentially endogenous.

evidence for parallel pre-trends and show the timing of the response to
interest rate shocks. They also help us identify a valid control group for
mortgage holders – cash buyers – not used in other research.8 Another
use  of  quarterly  data  is  to  identify  nonlinear  effects  of  interest  rate
gaps identified solely from changes in interest rates over time, rather
than differences across cohorts; as compared to other work, we find
little evidence that negative ‘‘rate gaps’’ affect mobility. We also explore
heterogeneous effects by region, race, income and financial factors. The
effects are much larger for people who recently refinanced, and about
half as large for out-of-state moves as for inter-zip moves.

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section 2
discusses institutional details and presents a simple calculation of the
contribution of interest rate lock to the cost of moving. Section 3 de-
scribes the data we use to obtain high-frequency measures of mobility
rates. Section 4 presents our main empirical strategy. Section 5 presents
the main results and robustness analysis. Section 6 concludes.

2.  Institutional details and motivating framework

Since  2010,  the  vast  majority  of  U.S.  residential  mortgages  have
been fixed rate (known as FRM).9 Interest rates are fixed at origination,
sometimes with a (pre-established) discount early in the mortgage’s life.
Nearly all U.S. residential mortgages are securitized by the home,
are  not  assumable  by  a  new  buyer,  allow  for  prepayment  without
substantial penalties, and must be paid in full if and when the home
is sold.10 These features create what we call ‘‘interest rate lock’’ for
FRM  borrowers.11 A  homeowner  who  wishes  to  move  must  assume

8 Fonseca and Liu (2024) use renters as a comparison for mortgage holders.
We  found  evidence  that  renters’  mobility  was  not  on  a  parallel  trend  to
mortgage  holders  prior  to  the  rate  hikes,  so  we  focus  on  non-mortgage
homeowners as preferable comparison group.

9 The FRM share of mortgage applications rose from about 2/3 in 2004-5 to
95% in 2009, and has been above 90% nearly all of the time since (Goodman
et al., 2023).
10 Mortgages ensured by the FHA and VA are assumable, but only under
strict conditions, and assumption appears to be rare.
11 A conceptually distinct type of housing lock arises when the market value
of the house is insufficient to pay off the remaining balance on the mortgage
— when the borrower is ‘‘underwater’’. This has been studied more — see,
e.g., Ferreira et al. (2010).

3 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

not only the difference in prices between the old and new house, but
also a new interest rate. If market rates are higher at the time of the
move than at the time of the original mortgage’s origination, his or
her payments will go up even if the size of the mortgage is the same.
Thus, the rise in interest rates can be seen as imposing a capital loss on
the borrower.12 However, the homeowner can avoid the capital loss by
remaining in the old house. He or she thus has an incentive not to move.
This distortion can lead to inefficiencies, if homeowners are unable to
pursue new job opportunities in different locations or to downsize when
life circumstances make that appropriate.13

The left panel of Fig. 1 shows the path of mortgage interest rates
since  2013.  Rates  oscillated  between  about  3.5%  and  5%  between
2013  and  2020,  falling  below  3%  in  the  wake  of  the  COVID  crisis.
In early 2022, however, they began rising sharply, following Federal
Reserve  monetary  policy  tightening,  and  they  have  been  above  6%
since September 2022.

We overlay on this graph the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of
interest rates on outstanding FRMs, calculated from the Fannie Mae
Single-Family  Loan  Performance  sample.14 These  are  based  on  the
distribution of rates across loans issued at many different times, and
as such move much more slowly than does the current rate series. For
example, the decline in rates that began in 2018 does not show up
in the outstanding loan rate distribution until 2020. A consequence is
that the distribution of rates on outstanding mortgages in 2022 and
2023 largely reflects the pre-2021 low-rate environment. Even the 75th
percentile of that distribution was below 4% at the end of 2022, 2.5
percentage points below the rate then being offered on new mortgages.
The  cost  of  taking  on  a  new  mortgage  is  directly  related  to  the
gap  between  the  currently  offered  rate  and  the  rate  on  the  existing
mortgage. To fix ideas, consider a homeowner with a mortgage that was
taken out in the past at some annual rate 𝑅0, with remaining principal
𝑃 and 𝑚 monthly payments remaining in the term. Suppose that the
homeowner is considering moving to a new house of identical value,
and converting all of his/her remaining equity into a down payment.
This means that he will need to take out a new mortgage with principal
𝑃 at new interest rate 𝑅1. For simplicity, assume the remaining term
will be the same, 𝑚 months.

Using standard amortization formulas, the monthly payment for the
existing  mortgage  is 𝑃 ∗ 𝑓 (𝑅0),  where 𝑓 (𝑅) ≡
1−(1+𝑅0∕12)−𝑚 ,  while
the monthly payment for the new mortgage will be 𝑃 ∗ 𝑓 (𝑅1). Note
that 𝑓 (⋅) is increasing in 𝑅, so the new mortgage payment is higher.
With discount rate 𝛿, the present value of the cost of trading the former
obligation for the latter is

𝑅0∕12

𝑃

𝑓 (𝑅1) − 𝑓 (𝑅0)
𝑓 (𝛿)

.

This can be substantial. An increase from 𝑅0 = 3.5% to 𝑅1 = 7%, with
𝛿 = 7%, raises the present value of future payments by 38%.15 The right
panel of Fig. 1 shows the average monthly payment gap over time —
the amount that the average mortgage holder’s monthly payment would
increase if the mortgage was re-issued at the current market rate, with

12 Taking out a mortgage is, effectively, issuing a bond. Bond values rise
when rates increase and fall when they decrease. Borrowers are short bonds,
so take losses and gains, respectively.
13 Similar inefficiencies have been noted due to property tax rules that tie
the tax bill to the purchase price (Ferreira, 2010) and to rent control regimes
that limit rent increases for incumbent tenants (e.g., Munch and Svarer, 2002).
A longstanding policy conversation points to declining mobility rates as an
indication  of  reduced  dynamism  of  the  U.S.  economy  (e.g., Molloy  et  al.,
2016).

14 https://capitalmarkets.fanniemae.com/credit-risk-transfer/single-family-

credit-risk-transfer/fannie-mae-single-family-loan-performance-data.
15 We have neglected the possibility that the term could be extended with
a new mortgage. This would lower the monthly payment, but (so long as the
discount rate is below 𝑅1) not the present value of the stream of payments.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

the same term and principal.16 This is generally low or even zero, when
most mortgages are at or above the market rate, but rises above zero
when rates increase in 2013, 2018, and especially 2022. By 2023, the
average mortgage holder’s payment would increase by over $400 per
month if the mortgage was re-issued at the then-prevailing rate. This
is the cost that the homeowner would need to pay if he/she wanted
to move to a home of equivalent value elsewhere. It creates a large
disincentive to move.

Rising rates can also cause lock-in through a second channel. Higher
rates can reduce the value of homes, directly by increasing the payment
that a prospective buyer would need to pay to finance a mortgage at
any given value or indirectly via negative effects on overall economic
activity that reduce demand in the housing market. This could push
homeowners ‘‘underwater’’, owing more on their mortgage than they
could obtain by selling, and thus reduce their ability to finance a move.
In the present episode, the rise in rates has not been associated with
a  large  decline  in  average  values.  Moreover,  our  analysis  builds  in
two features that enable us to distinguish interest rate lock from value
effects: We compare the change in mobility for mortgage holders to
that for non-mortgage-holding homeowners, and we control directly
and flexibly for the change in home values in the local area.

3.  Data

Our  main  data  source  is  the  University  of  California  Consumer
Credit  Panel  (UC-CCP),  developed  and  maintained  by  the  California
Policy  Lab  at  the  University  of  California.  UC-CCP  is  a  nationally
representative credit registry containing longitudinal information on a
2% random sample of U.S. individuals with a credit history. Quarterly
data on households and credit accounts are constructed from records
compiled by one of the major credit reporting agencies. Address in-
formation includes the ZIP code of residence. Residential locations are
updated shortly after moves, as financial institutions stay in close touch
with  their  clients.  For  this  reason,  the  UC-CCP  is  ideal  for  measur-
ing mobility among households with a credit history, a group which
includes the mortgage borrowers who are our focus.17

We  identify  all  unique  mortgage  originations  between  the  first
quarter  of  2013  and  the  end  of  2020,  identifying  a  mortgage  by
the combination of borrower, origination date, and principal amount.
We measure whether and when thereafter the borrower relocates to
another ZIP code, or in some specifications to another state, within the
first ten years (40 quarters) after origination, using data through the
second quarter of 2023.18 We also measure whether the mortgage is
closed, which could happen without a move when a mortgage is paid
off or refinanced.

We construct a sample of all mortgage originations, treating each
as the beginning of a new spell. We think it is important to consider
both originations that reflect new purchases and those that reflect refi-
nancings, as the latter make up a large share of the market. However,
including both means that a single household–ZIP combination can be
represented by several overlapping spells - one begins when the home
is purchased, and another begins when it is refinanced. We include both
as distinct spells, assigning each a weight of 0.5. Similarly, households
that refinance twice receive three spells, each with a 0.33 weight.

The next question is when a spell ends. One option would be to
identify a spell with the duration of the original mortgage, considering
it to have ended when the mortgage is paid off. However, this would

16 At the individual mortgage level, this is 𝑚𝑎𝑥{0, 𝑃 (𝑓 (𝑅1) − 𝑓 (𝑅0)
)
}. We
calculate this in our credit data sample, described below, and then average
over the 𝑃 s, 𝑅0s, and 𝑚s of all outstanding mortgages in each month.
17 See Holmes (2021) and Holmes and White (2022).
18 To reflect the possibility that people may not move into a newly purchased
house  immediately  after  the  mortgage  is  originated,  we  identify  the  house
location based on the purchaser’s location two quarters after origination, and
consider only moves after that point.

4 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

mean that households that refinance exit the sample. This would make
the sample quite unrepresentative at higher tenures, particularly fol-
lowing the very low rate period in 2019–2020. To ensure that this does
not affect the results, households that refinance their mortgages are
retained in the sample, not counting as having failed so long as they
remain in the original ZIP code. Thus, spells end when the household
leaves the origination ZIP, after 40 quarters, or at the end of our data
in 2023, whichever comes first.19

We  proxy  for  a  mortgage’s  interest  rate  with  the  market  rate  at
the time that it was originated. This abstracts from idiosyncratic vari-
ation  across  borrowers  in  the  rates  they  receive,  which  may  reflect
unobserved  differences  in  creditworthiness.20 Quarterly  market  rates
come from Freddie Mac’s Primary Mortgage Market Survey and pertain
to  30-year  FRMs.  Our  primary  measure  updates  to  the  new  market
rate whenever a mortgage was refinanced, but we construct a second
measure  that  preserves  the  original  mortgage’s  origination  rate  as
well.21

We construct a second panel of homeowners who do not have a
mortgage, who we refer to as ‘‘cash buyers’’. Here, ‘‘spells’’ begin when
the household moves into a ZIP code, and end when the household
leaves it. This sample includes only households that are classified by
the credit panel as homeowners in the quarter they move, excluding
households where any household member has an active mortgage in
that quarter.22

Our models control for local home price changes. To measure this,
we use ZIP level house price indexes from Zillow.  We calculate the
change in house prices in a ZIP code since a mortgage was originated.

3.1.  Summary statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the main analysis sample.
In Panel A, we present statistics at the mortgage level. We have over
1.8 million mortgages in our sample. New purchases are 36% of the
originations in our sample, with the remainder being refinancings. The
average origination interest rate is 3.8%. 59% of mortgages are closed
within five years of origination, about half due to moves out of the zip
code and half to refinancings.

Panel B shows statistics at the mortgage-by-quarter level, with 26
million  quarterly  observations.  Our  observations  on  each  mortgage
begin  when  it  is  originated  and  continue  to  the  earliest  of  (a)  the
quarter that the household moves out of the ZIP code, (b) ten years
after  origination,  or  (c)  the  fourth  quarter  of  2023,  when  our  data
end.  Appendix  Figure  B.2  shows  the  survival  curve  in  our  sample.
Here, a household is counted as surviving from mortgage origination
until the household leaves the ZIP code, even if the mortgage is closed
(refinanced or paid off) first; in about 31% of our quarterly observations
on  surviving  spells  the  original  mortgage  has  been  closed.  The  gap
between the mortgage rate in effect for the mortgage and the current
rate averages 0.3 percentage points, but for the 53% of mortgages with
a  positive  gap  it  averages  1.1%.  Appendix  Table  B.1  shows  parallel
statistics for our sample of homeowners without mortgages.

4.  Empirical strategy

Our analysis compares the mobility rates of households facing differ-
ent interest rate gaps between the fixed rates on their previously issued
mortgages and the current market rate. Because our data identify the
quarter in which a household moves but not the exact date, we adopt
a discrete-time hazard model for data observed at regular intervals. Let
𝑌𝑖 represent the duration (in quarters) from mortgage origination to a
household’s move out of the zip code, with 𝑌𝑖 = ∞ if the household
never moves. Let 𝑂∗(𝑖) represent the date on which mortgage 𝑖 was
originated, and let 𝑂(𝑖, 𝑡) ≥ 𝑂∗(𝑖) be the date on which it was most
recently refinanced as of the 𝑡th quarter after origination (with 𝑂(𝑖, 𝑡) =
𝑂∗(𝑖) for mortgages that have not been refinanced).

A conventional specification of the survival function is:

)

(1)

≥ 𝑡 ∣ 𝑋𝑖

) ≡ 𝑃 𝑟 (𝑌𝑖

= 𝑆0(𝑡)exp(𝑋𝑖𝛽),

𝑆 (𝑡 ∣ 𝑋𝑖
where 𝑆0(𝑡) is the baseline survival function and 𝑋𝑖 are time-invariant
characteristics of unit 𝑖.23 This implies a discrete-time hazard function
of the form
𝜆 (𝑡 ∣ 𝑋𝑖
where 𝜆0(𝑡) is the baseline hazard. This can be rearranged into a simple
partially linear form, known as a ‘‘complementary log–log’’ model:
ln(− ln(1 − 𝜆(𝑡 ∣ 𝑋𝑖))) = 𝛼(𝑡) + 𝑋𝑖𝛽 ,

)
) ≡ 𝑃 𝑟 (𝑌𝑖 = 𝑡 ∣ 𝑋𝑖, 𝑌𝑖 > 𝑡 − 1

]exp(𝑋𝑖𝛽) ,

1 − 𝜆0(𝑡)

= 1 −

(3)

(2)

[

where 𝛼(𝑡) = ln(− ln(1 − 𝜆0(𝑡))).

In our setting, the variable of interest, the gap between the mortgage
interest rate and the current market rate, is time-varying. We assume
that the per-period hazard satisfies24:
ln(− ln(1 − 𝜆(𝑡 ∣ 𝑋𝑖𝑡))) = 𝛼𝑡 + 𝑋𝑖𝑡𝛽 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡.

(4)

We  use  several  different  specifications  for 𝑋𝑖𝑡.  First,  we  simply
include a full set of calendar time indicators. The resulting specification
semi-parametrically measures changes in mobility hazards by quarter,
controlling for changes in tenure distributions. We plot the resulting
estimates to provide graphical evidence for the timing of changes in
mobility rates.

Next, we move to a more direct measure of the mortgage rate gap.
Let 𝑟𝑡 represent the market interest rate at time 𝑡. The prevailing rate
when mortgage 𝑖 was last refinanced is then 𝑟𝑂(𝑖,𝑡). We measure the rate
gap as 𝑔𝑖𝑡 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0, 𝑟𝑡 − 𝑟𝑂(𝑖,𝑡)), and include this in 𝑋𝑖𝑡.25 Depending on
the specification, control variables included in 𝑋𝑖𝑡 are linear calendar
time  (𝑡)  controls,  measures  of  negative  rate  gaps  (𝑚𝑖𝑛(0, 𝑟𝑡 − 𝑟𝑂(𝑖,𝑡))),
and/or changes in the Zillow home price index in the ZIP code from
origination to present for the focal mortgage, 𝑝𝑧(𝑖)𝑡 − 𝑝𝑧(𝑖)𝑂∗(𝑖). We also
test for potentially non-linear effects of rate gaps, by including a square
or cube of 𝑔𝑖𝑡 or by including indicators for rate gaps in certain ranges
(e.g., deciles of the distribution, or values above 1).

19 Another approach to this would be to estimate a competing risks model,
where mortgages ‘‘fail’’ either when the household moves or when they are
refinanced. We defer this to future work.
20 It  also  allows  us  not  to  rely  on  mortgage  rates  computed  from  credit
records, which are measured with substantial error (Shahidinejad, 2023).
21 For spells beginning with a refinance, the ‘‘origination’’ rate is that for
the date of the focal refinance origination, and the updated rate may differ if
the homeowner later refinanced again.
22 We do not condition on not taking out a mortgage later in defining our
non-mortgage owner sample. In the rare event where an individual buys a
home in cash and moves in, then later takes out a mortgage on the home, he
or she will appear in both our non-mortgage owner sample (based on the date
he or she arrived in the ZIP) and our mortgage holder sample (based on the
date the mortgage was originated). We present robustness checks that define
spell starts similarly for mortgage holders.

23 A  survival  function  of  this  form  can  be  derived  by  assuming  that
continuous-time data is described by the standard proportional hazards model,
but is observed only at discrete time intervals.
24 With time-varying 𝑋𝑖𝑡, this hazard does not generate a simple closed form
for the survival function, which in general will depend on the history of 𝑋 from
the mortgage’s origination to 𝑡, but the hazard remains well-defined. When
we interpret the 𝛽 coefficients in terms of their implications for survival, we
compute the running product of the implied 1 − 𝜆𝑖𝑡s. Note also that modeling
survival would require accounting for right-censoring of spells that are ongoing
at  the  end  of  the  sample,  but  this  is  not  needed  when  fitting  the  hazard
directly.
25 Fonseca  and  Liu (2024)  and Batzer  et  al. (2024)  examine  what  they
call a ‘‘rate delta’’ that is defined as the difference between the outstanding
mortgage’s rate and the current market rate — that is, the opposite sign as
our rate gap.

5 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Table 1
Mortgage summary statistics.
Panel A: Mortgage-level sample

Origination year
Refinance
Principal (thousands of dollars)
Origination rate
Quarters observed (max = 40)
Credit score
Age
Closed within 5 years
Moved within 5 years
Closed by end of panel
Moved by end of panel
Panel B: Mortgage-by-quarter panel

Mean

2017.393
0.641
260.689
3.796
21.831
746.284
46.136
0.590
0.314
0.588
0.478

Median

2017
1
213.75
3.78
22
759
45
1
0
1
0

Mean

Median

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Standard deviation
2.934
0.480
249.124
0.691
11.667
63.025
14.147
0.492
0.464
0.492
0.500

Min

2013
0
−0.02
2.65
0
348
18
0
0
0
0

Max

2022
1
100 000
7.08
40
850
128
1
1
1
1

Year
Rate gap (g)
Rate gap (g), conditional on positive
Rate gap (g), conditional on negative
Positive rate gap (g)
Rate gap vs. origination (g*)
Rate gap vs. origination (g*), conditional on positive
Rate gap vs. origination (g*), conditional on negative
Positive rate gap vs. origination (g*)
Log ZHVI change
Mortgage still open
Mortgage closed this quarter
Household moved this quarter
Notes: N = 1,870,171 mortgages in panel A; N = 26,509,578 mortgage-quarter observations in panel B. Statistics pertain to mortgage sample; mortgage-quarter sample is restricted
to quarters before a household moves.

2019.065
0.338
0.567
−0.228
0.480
0.313
1.110
−0.582
0.530
0.208
0.690
0.026
0.034

2013
−13.86
0
−13.86
0
−2.18
0
−2.18
0
−2.33
0
0
0

2019
0
0
0
0
0.04
0.66
−0.49
1
0.16
1
0
0

2023
4.01
4.01
0
1
4.01
4.01
−0
1
3.83
1
1
1

Standard deviation
2.698
1.199
13
0.414
0.500
1.196
1.085
0.449
0.499
0.197
0.462
0.160
0.180

Min

Max

Of course, individual-level hazard rates are not observed directly. To
implement our analysis, we divide our sample into cells defined by the
interaction of origination quarter, duration, mortgage type (purchase
mortgage or refinance), and ZIP code home price appreciation bins.26
The resulting cells each include thousands of mortgages. Let 𝑐 index
cells,  where 𝑔𝑐
is  the  vector  of
is  the  rate  gap  for  cell 𝑐 and 𝑋𝑐
controls.27 We compute the empirical hazard for cell 𝑐, 𝜆𝑐 , as the share
of households in the cell who move out of the ZIP code at duration
𝑑 (which  we  write  as 𝑑(𝑐) to  reflect  that  duration  is  fixed  for  each
cell). Because cells are large, we can measure this hazard accurately.
Per Eq. (3), this gives rise to a simple regression:
ln(− ln(1 − 𝜆𝑐 )) = 𝛼𝑑(𝑐) + 𝑔𝑐 𝛾 + 𝑋𝑐 𝛽 + 𝑢𝑐.
We estimate this via weighted least squares, weighting by the number
of  mortgages  in  cell 𝑐 and  allowing  separate  baseline  hazards  for
purchase mortgage and refinanced mortgages. Because 𝜆𝑐 is generally
small, ln(1 − 𝜆𝑐) ≈ −𝜆𝑐, so the left hand side of (5) is approximately
equal to ln(𝜆𝑐 ). This means that 𝛾 can be interpreted as the percentage
change in the hazard per one-unit increase in 𝑋𝑐 .

As noted, we keep mortgages in our panel even if they are refi-
nanced. Keeping refinanced mortgages is important for identification,
since refinancing is likely to depend on the current rate gap. However,
if households that anticipate moving soon are less likely to refinance
to obtain lower rates, this could create an endogenous relationship be-
tween a household’s propensity to move and the measured rate gap. To
address this, we use an instrumental variables strategy, instrumenting
for 𝑔𝑖𝑡 with an alternative rate gap that uses the rate at the time the focal

(5)

26 The  home  price  appreciation  bins  group  ZIP  codes  with  similar  price
trends from origination to the end of our sample. For each origination date,
we divide ZIPs into ten deciles.
27 𝑔𝑖𝑡 may vary within cells, as households with the same origination date
may have refinanced at different times. Per (4), we use the average of 𝑔𝑖𝑡 within
the cell for 𝑔𝑐 . Below, we discuss an instrumental variables strategy that uses
a gap constructed from the origination rate 𝑟𝑂∗(𝑖,𝑡); this is constant within cells,
as are our other 𝑋 variables.

≡
mortgage was originated rather than the most recent refinance, 𝑔∗
𝑖𝑡
𝑚𝑎𝑥(0, 𝑟𝑡 −𝑟0∗(𝑖)). Palmer (2022) discusses the estimation of instrumental
variables hazard models via a control function approach. Our cell-based
approach allows a simpler estimator: We simply estimate (5) with two
stage least squares, again weighting by cell size.

We interpret the coefficient on 𝑔 as the causal effect of the rate gap
on moving hazards, and use our estimates to calculate counterfactual
survival curves given different levels of rate lock. The large and un-
expected nature of the 2022 interest rate shock helps to identify the
effects of rate gaps. Estimates from earlier years might be confounded
by slow-moving macroeconomic variables, like demographic change or
secular trends in migration. In 2022, event study graphs show large
changes in mobility, right at the time that rates went up, exactly for
the groups we expect.

Our  preferred  specification  controls  for  origination-cohort  fixed
effects, ensuring that the estimates are identified by changes in rates
after each mortgage was originated. An alternative strategy, pursued
by Fonseca and Liu (2024), would use variation in mortgage origination
dates to identify the effects of mortgage rate lock — homeowners who
originated at lower-rate times face more of a penalty for moving than
do other homeowners who originated when rates were higher, so the
contrast in the two groups’ mobility rates could be used to measure the
effect of rate lock. This approach could result in biased estimates, how-
ever. Households who know they are likely to move may be less likely
to refinance, creating a correlation between time-since-origination and
current  mobility.  Origination  quarter  is  also  likely  correlated  with
household characteristics since some types of households are system-
atically more likely to refinance when rates fall (Andersen et al., 2020;
Gerardi et al., 2023). For example, younger households are more likely
to  refinance  when  rates  are  low  and  are  also  more  mobile,  biasing
downward estimates that do not control for origination date.28

28 In Appendix Table B.2, we estimate specifications identified by cohort
variation in mortgage origination rates, as in Fonseca and Liu (2024), rather

6 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

The main challenge to our interpretation is that omitted variables
that are correlated with interest rate movements may affect household
mobility.  An  obvious  candidate  is  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  Interest
rates  rose  exactly  when  the  U.S.  economy  was  recovering  from  the
pandemic, which might have affected mobility directly. Our strategy
here is to compare mortgage holders to other households that also were
experiencing any pandemic effects but were not directly affected by
interest rates. We show that mobility of households with mortgages
is  much  more  sensitive  to  interest  rate  gaps  than  is  the  mobility  of
mortgage-free homeowners.

In  comparing  mortgage  holders  to  non-mortgage  homeowners
(‘‘cash  buyers’’),  a  concern  is  that  they  may  be  different  in  other
relevant characteristics (e.g., age) that influence sensitivity to market
conditions. Thus, as a first step we reweight the cash buyer sample
to match our main sample on observable characteristics, including the
calendar quarter, origination cohort, ZIP code group, and homeowner
age,  credit  score,  and  outstanding  debt.  Details  of  this  reweighting
are discussed in the appendix. We construct cell observations for cash
buyers from the reweighted data. We combine these with the mortgage
holders to estimate ‘‘difference-in-hazard’’ specifications. These interact
our duration controls and all of our 𝑋𝑐 variables with indicators for
the type of owner, and identify the mortgage lock effect from the extra
effect of the rate gap on mortgage holders relative to its effect on cash
buyers.29 We add to the specifications time fixed effects that capture
any time-varying market conditions (e.g., liquidity), on the assumption
that these conditions have similar effects on mortgage holders and on
observably similar cash buyers.

5.  Main results

5.1.  Empirical hazard rates by cohort

The left panel of Fig. 2 shows empirical estimates of the hazard for
mobility out of the zip code, grouping mortgages into four two-year
origination ‘‘cohorts’’. For all cohorts, the mobility hazard is high in the
first two years after origination, then declines to a low but stable level
thereafter.  However,  we  see  that  each  cohort  mobility  hazard  turns
down sharply near the end of the available data (though for the 2021–
22 originations this downturn is simultaneous with the post-origination
decline). For each cohort, the timing of the downturn corresponds to
observations from calendar year 2022 or 2023, which in event time
represent quarters 4–11 for 2021:Q1 originations but quarters 20–27
for 2017:Q1 originations.

The right panel of Fig. 2 shows hazards for a different outcome,
closing  the  mortgage.  This  can  precede  moves  when  mortgages  are
refinanced  or  simply  prepaid.  The  profile  here  is  different.  There  is
a  prominent  peak  in  each  series  that  corresponds  to  calendar  times
around  2020.  We  interpret  this  as  reflecting  large-scale  refinancing
in  the  low  interest  rate  environment  of  2019–2021.  The  hazard  of
mortgage closing then falls in 2022 and 2023.

than time variation in market rates on a potential new mortgage. The coeffi-
cients are less than half the size of those in our preferred specifications and
are much noisier — likely because including current quarter effects removes
much of the identifying variation.
29 Specifically,  we  include  a  rate  gap  main  effect  and  rate  gap-mortgage
holder interaction, and report the latter coefficient. In IV specifications, our
instruments are 𝑔∗ (using zero for cash buyer observations) and a 𝑔∗-mortgage
holder interaction.

7 

5.2.  Estimates of moving hazard

To aggregate the different series in Fig. 2 into a single quantitative
estimate  of  the  time  profile  of  mobility,  we  fit  a  semi-parametric
complementary log–log hazard model, (5).

We begin with a very flexible model that includes only a full set
of calendar time (𝑡) indicators, along with separate duration indicators
(baseline hazards) for purchase loan and refinance observations. The
upper left panel of Fig. 3 plots the estimated calendar time coefficients.
(The estimated baseline hazard function 𝜆0(𝑑) is plotted in Appendix
Figure B.3.30) This shows a sharp decline of about 20 percentage points
in the mobility hazard at the beginning of 2022. The timing of this
decline lines up neatly with the rise in interest rates and the increase
in predicted interest rate lock in Fig. 1. The mobility hazard declines
further  in  late  2022  and  2023.  There  is  also  a  temporary  upward
discontinuity in mobility in mid-2020, reflecting COVID effects.

The  upper  right  panel  shows  coefficients  from  a  similar  model
estimated on refinanced loans. The series is a bit noisier here, but shows
a decline of similar magnitude in early 2022. The lower left panel shows
a model for purchase loans (i.e., mortgages taken out on the purchase
of the home — the complement of the refinance sample). This series is
noisier still, and the 2020 jump is more notable. Nevertheless, we still
see a sharp drop in mobility in 2022.

The final panel of Fig. 3 plots estimates for the sample of home-
owners  without  mortgages  (‘‘cash  buyers’’).  Here  and  in  subsequent
analyses,  this  sample  is  reweighted  to  match  the  mortgage  holder
sample  on  calendar  time,  cohort,  zip  code  group,  and  homeowner
age,  credit  score,  and  outstanding  debt,  as  discussed  in  Section 4.
There  is  no  sharp  change  in  mobility  rates  at  the  start  of  2022  for
this sample, though there is a small decline in mid-2022. A plausible
interpretation of this delayed decline in mobility is that lower housing
turnover affected even households that who did not need a mortgage,
underscoring  the  importance  of  using  homeowners  as  a  comparison
group  rather  than  including  renters,  who  would  not  be  affected  by
changes in owner-occupied housing turnover.31

The pattern in Fig. 3 clearly points to interest rate changes in 2022–
23 as drivers of the decline in mobility of mortgage holders in this
period.  To  explore  this,  we  move  to  a  more  parametric  model  that
replaces calendar time effects with the rate gap measure defined above,
plus controls.

The first three columns in the first row of Table 2 present coefficient
estimates from (5). In column 1, we include just season fixed effects
as controls (along with the baseline hazard, allowed to vary freely for
purchase loans and refinances). Column 2 adds a linear time control,
while column 3 adds origination cohort (quarter) fixed effects as well
as controls for negative interest rate gaps (set to zero when the gap is
positive) and a flexible polynomial in the change in log home values in
the ZIP code from mortgage origination to present (specified as separate
cubics in positive and negative changes). We see substantial negative
effects on mobility rates. The −0.05 coefficient in column 1 implies
that  a  one  percentage  point  increase  in  the  rate  gap  (e.g.,  a  rise  in
interest rates from 4% to 5%) reduces the probability that a rate-locked

30 The baseline hazard for refinance mortgages falls off surprisingly quickly
after the first year after origination. This plausibly reflects misclassification of
locations. Recall that we assign a mortgage’s location based on the mortgage
holder’s address two quarters after origination, and classify a mortgage as a
refinance if the holder does not move around the origination. If an individual
buys a home with a mortgage, but does not move in until 3 or more quarters
after the origination, we classify the mortgage as a refinance located in the
pre-move location, and count the homeowner as moving out when in fact they
move in. Our results are robust to estimating our mobility models excluding all
quarters within as little as one quarter or as much as one year of origination.
31 When we repeat the analysis for renters, we do not find a discontinuity in
mobility when rates rise, suggesting that renters’ mobility depends on different
factors than homeowners.

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Fig. 2. Empirical hazards of moving and closing mortgage, by time since mortgage initiation. Notes: Panel A shows ZIP code moving hazards by quarter since origination. The
share of moving households at time 𝑡 is calculated for each cohort as the share of households moving between 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡 divided by the share that have not moved at 𝑡 − 1. Panel
B shows mortgage closing hazards, calculated similarly. Mortgages may be closed when the household moves or by prepayment or refinancing.
Source: University of California (UC-CCP).

Fig. 3. Calendar time effects on mobility from complementary log–log hazard model, varying samples. Notes: Calendar time effects are from estimates of complementary log–log
hazard models where failure is mobility out of the ZIP code. All models control for nonparametric baseline hazard in the elapsed time since the mortgage was originated (𝑡 − 𝑂(𝑖)).
Calendar time fixed effects are seasonally adjusted by subtracting the seasonal mean over the sample period.
Source: University of California (UC-CCP).

homeowner (with a mortgage rate below 4%) moves in a quarter by
about 5%. This grows to nearly 8% with the additional controls.

The second row of Table 2 repeats these specifications, this time
examining moves out of the state rather than out of the zip code. These
coefficients are a bit smaller and more sensitive to the inclusion of a
linear time trend, but with that control we find that a one percentage
point increase in the rate gap reduces out-of-state mobility by about
4.3%.

Columns 4–6 of the table repeat the model using our instrumental
variables specification, instrumenting for the current rate gap with the
one that would apply if the focal mortgage had not been subsequently
refinanced.32 This  leads  to  very  slightly  larger  effects,  but  generally
does not change the results meaningfully.

32 First stage and reduced form specifications are reported in Appendix Table
B.3.

8 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Table 2
Estimates of the effects of interest rate gaps on mobility, varying samples.
Source: University of California Consumer Credit Panel (UC-CCP).

Main sample

Out-of-ZIP moves

Out-of-state moves

Controls

Season FE
Linear time
Origination cohort FE
ZHVI & negative rate gap
Alternative sample (out-of-ZIP moves)

Mortgage purchase

Refinance

Cash buyers

OLS

(1)

−0.050
(0.003)
−0.011
(0.005)

×

−0.026
(0.004)
−0.062
(0.004)
−0.034
(0.003)

(2)

(3)

−0.076
(0.004)
−0.041
(0.005)

×
×

−0.018
(0.004)
−0.105
(0.005)
−0.022
(0.003)

−0.077
(0.005)
−0.043
(0.007)

×
×
×
×

−0.023
(0.006)
−0.100
(0.008)
−0.022
(0.005)

IV

(4)

−0.052
(0.003)
−0.014
(0.005)

×

−0.025
(0.004)
−0.065
(0.004)

(5)

−0.077
(0.004)
−0.044
(0.005)

×
×

−0.018
(0.004)
−0.107
(0.005)

(6)

−0.079
(0.005)
−0.050
(0.007)

×
×
×
×

−0.028
(0.006)
−0.101
(0.008)

Stacked specification, main sample vs. cash buyers (out-of-ZIP moves)

With time FEs

−0.054
(0.007)
−0.055
(0.007)

−0.014
(0.006)
−0.018
(0.006)

With time-cohort-location FEs

−0.054
(0.012)
−0.061
(0.015)
Notes: In this table, columns 1–3 present OLS estimates from equation 5. Columns 4–6 present IV estimates where the current rate gap is instrumented using the rate that would
prevail if the focal mortgage had remained unrefinanced. Interest rate gap is the difference between the current market rate at time 𝑡 and the market rate at the time the mortgage
was last refinanced, 𝑔𝑖𝑡. ‘‘Mortgage Purchases’’ are mortgages taken out to finance a new purchase (identified from households who move into the ZIP code around the time of
origination). ‘‘Cash buyers’’ are homeowners who do not have a mortgage at the time they move into a zip code, and are reweighted to match mortgage holders (purchases and
refinances) on observables. Final panel includes both mortgage holders and cash buyers in the sample and interacts all variables (including the baseline hazard) with indicators
for the subsample. Coefficients reported here are for the rate gap-mortgage holder interaction, controlling for the rate gap main effect. In IV specifications, the main effect and
interaction are instrumented with the no-refinance instrument (set to zero for cash buyers) and its interaction with type. Standard errors in all panels are clustered at the origination
quarter by zip home price index group level.

−0.050
(0.007)
−0.055
(0.008)

−0.056
(0.010)
−0.066
(0.012)

−0.014
(0.006)
−0.022
(0.007)

The second panel of the table shows estimates for several alternative
samples. We first divide the main sample into purchase mortgages and
refinances. Effects are notably larger for refinances, perhaps reflecting
greater financial sophistication of households that have refinanced or
nonlinear effects combined with larger rate gaps for households that
refinanced to very low rates around 2019. (We explore this possibility
further below.) In our preferred specification (column 5), a one per-
centage  point  increase  in  the  rate  gap  reduces  mobility  of  purchase
mortgages by 2% and that of households holding refinanced mortgages
by 11%.

The  next  row  shows  results  for  our  sample  of  (reweighted)  cash
buyers. Here, we present only OLS specifications, as the IV strategy does
not apply when refinancing is not possible. The coefficients are around
−0.022, much smaller than for refinances or for our main sample (but
comparable to those for mortgage purchases).

The  final  panel  of  the  table  shows  difference-in-hazard  specifi-
cations  that  contrast  the  mobility  hazards  of  mortgage  holders  and
cash buyers (after reweighting the latter to have similar observables
as the mortgage holders, as discussed above). The first row includes
calendar  time  (year-quarter)  fixed  effects,  while  the  second  further
adds time-by-origination cohort-by ZIP code group fixed effects. Results
are  a  bit  smaller  than  what  we  find  in  our  main  sample,  but  still
highly significant in specifications including time controls. This sug-
gests that the dynamics we identify in our main results are not driven
by secular changes in mobility or other aspects of the housing market
(e.g., changes in home values) that would affect mortgage holders and
owners without mortgages similarly.

Appendix Figure B.4 shows difference-in-hazard event study graphs,
similar to Fig. 3 but showing the difference in fixed effects between
mortgage purchasers and cash buyers. The first panel shows estimates
without controls, equivalent to the difference between the first and last
panels of Fig. 3. In the second panel we add controls as in Column 3 of

Table 2, excluding controls that are collinear with the time fixed effects
we estimate to create the figure. We are reassured by the fact that the
estimated decrease in mobility post-rate hikes is similar across panels,
starting around −0.1 and falling to around −0.2 after three quarters.
The rise in mobility after the start of the COVID-19 pandemic is visible
in both figures, following what we see in the first panel of Fig. 3. Adding
controls  in  the  second  panel  of  Figure  B.4  reduces  the  noise  in  the
pre-COVID period, making the effects of higher rates more prominent.
We have also explored whether the effects of rate gaps vary with
homeowner or neighborhood characteristics. Table 3 presents estimates
of  heterogeneity  along  a  number  of  dimensions.  For  each  indicated
characteristic,  we  divide  our  main  sample  in  half,  and  estimate  our
main  OLS  and  IV  specifications  in  each.  For  example,  the  first  row
shows  estimates  for  homeowners  in  zip  codes  with  minority  shares
below 21.5% (‘‘Low’’) and above it (‘‘High’’). We find slightly more
responsiveness  in  low-minority-share  ZIP  codes.  In  general,  we  see
relatively little evidence of heterogeneous effects, though it does appear
that older households are less affected (in the IV specification), as are
those  with  low  loan-to-value  (proxied  by  having  a  principal  that  is
above 84% of the average home value in the ZIP code).

5.2.1.  Robustness tests

Our  base  models  allow  for  the  rate  gap  to  have  different  effects
when positive (and thus the household is potentially locked in) and
when negative (which would make refinancing a potentially attractive
option but should not affect mobility). But they otherwise force the
effect to be linear. Fig. 4 loosens this. We divide the rate gap distri-
bution (including both positive and negative values) into 20 ventiles,
and  then  include  indicators  for  19  of  them  in  our  regression.  The
omitted  category  is  the  ventile  corresponding  to  zero  rate  gap.  For
ventiles corresponding to rate gaps above about 1 percent, we see a
clear negative effect of higher rate gaps on mobility. The trend is harder

9 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Table 3
Heterogeneous effects of interest rate gaps on mobility by borrower characteristics.
Source: University of California Consumer Credit Panel (UC-CCP).

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Minority share of zip

High: share ≥ 0.215

Home values

High: value ≥ $209,900

Homeowner share

High: share ≥ 0.672

Median incomes

High: value ≥ $61,774

Age

High: age ≥ 45

Urban share

High: share ≥ 0.85

Credit Score at Origination
High: score ≥ 753

Mortgage term (months)

High: term (months) ≥ 360

Principal

High: principal ≥ $213,750

Principal to average zip home value

High: ratio ≥ 0.842

OLS

Low

(1)

-0.081
(0.008)

-0.067
(0.007)

-0.067
(0.007)

-0.064
(0.006)

-0.054
(0.007)

-0.080
(0.007)

-0.070
(0.006)

-0.089
(0.010)

-0.082
(0.006)

-0.090
(0.007)

High

(2)

-0.069
(0.007)

-0.080
(0.007)

-0.081
(0.007)

-0.080
(0.007)

-0.099
(0.007)

-0.074
(0.007)

-0.075
(0.009)

-0.065
(0.007)

-0.070
(0.008)

-0.059
(0.007)

IV

Low

(3)

-0.082
(0.007)

-0.069
(0.007)

-0.070
(0.007)

-0.066
(0.006)

-0.055
(0.007)

-0.082
(0.006)

-0.072
(0.006)

-0.092
(0.010)

-0.084
(0.006)

-0.092
(0.007)

High

(4)

-0.071
(0.006)

-0.083
(0.007)

-0.082
(0.007)

-0.082
(0.007)

-0.100
(0.007)

-0.076
(0.007)

-0.077
(0.009)

-0.066
(0.006)

-0.072
(0.008)

-0.060
(0.007)

Season FE
Linear Time Controls
Notes: In this table, columns 1 and 2 present OLS estimates from Eq. (5) while columns 3 and 4 present IV estimates. Samples are divided according to the indicated variable;
the dividing point is the median for all variables except urban share (where we use 0.85, and about 2/3 of observations are in the ‘‘high’’ category) and mortgage term (where
we use 360 months, and about 3/4 of observations are in the ‘‘high’’ category). Standard errors are clustered at the origination quarter by zip home price index group level.

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

to see for lower rate gaps — there may still be a negative slope, but it
is definitely smaller.

Appendix Figure B.6 presents a similar graph using only 10 deciles,
allowing more precision but less flexibility. Here, we can see a clear
downward trend as the rate gap moves from −1.5 to −0.5, little effect
of the rate gap between −0.5 and 1.0, and then the same negative effect
above 1.0 that we see in Fig. 4. Fonseca and Liu (2024) estimate a
qualitatively similar pattern, with flattening out in the middle of the
distribution.33

Appendix Table B.4 presents more parametric models that allow for
nonlinear effects of the rate gap via polynomial terms and indicators for
gaps in specified ranges (e.g., for gaps above 2 percentage points). They
indicate that the downward trend in mobility as the rate gap increases
from −1.5 to +1 that is visible in Fig. 4 is statistically significant, but
that even when this is included there is still a substantial, significant
additional effect of rate gaps above +1.

An important question is whether the relationship between rate gaps
and  mobility  changed  in  the  recent  period.  The  simple  nonlinearity
seen in Fig. 4 would mean different effects in 2022 and 2023 even

33 Fonseca and Liu (2024) emphasize an apparent kink in the relationship
for rate gaps below about −2 (in our notation). As Fig. 4 indicates (see also
Appendix Figure B.5), we have very few gaps that negative in our sample.
This reflects differences in measurement. We compute the rate gap using the
market rate at the time of origination, while Fonseca and Liu (2024) main
estimates use the imputed actual rate on the mortgage. Using the market rate
reduces the variation, but guards against bias from unobserved characteristics
that influence the origination rate. By using a linear regression, we also avoid
the bias in the binscatter command described by Cattaneo et al. (2024).

with fixed coefficients, as the distribution of rate gaps in this period
is so different from what has been seen before, but there could be even
larger changes if the response function has changed as well. Appendix
Figure B.6 shows estimates both for the full sample and the pre-2022
subsample. As it indicates (see also Appendix Figure B.5), there are
essentially no observations before 2022 with rate gaps corresponding
to the ventiles with large effects in Fig. 4. However, in the range where
the two distributions overlap, there is little indication of changes in the
response function in 2022.

Appendix  Table  B.5  presents  a  number  of  additional  robustness
tests. The first row repeats our primary specification. The second row
shows  results  where  we  cluster  by  origination  quarter  (rather  than
origination  quarter-by-price  growth  group,  as  in  the  main  results).
Rows 3, 4, and 5 present alternative specifications of the hazard model
(i.e., of the link function in (3) — first a Poisson model, then using the
log hazard or the hazard itself as the dependent variable in (5).34 These
yield broadly similar results.35

Rows 6 and 7 vary the controls — 6 removes entry quarter (cohort)
effects,  while  7  adds  year-by-quarter  fixed  effects.  The  former  has
minimal effect, indicating that our estimates are driven by variation
in the contemporaneous rate, not by variation in the origination rate.

34 We do not present an IV version of the Poisson model.
35 The rate gap coefficient on the untransformed hazard is −0.0012. This
specification identifies an effect in percentage points, where our main spec-
ifications  estimate  percentage  effects.  The  sample  average  hazard  is  0.034
(Table 1), so a −0.12 percentage point effect corresponds to a percentage effect
of −0.035 at the sample mean — smaller than in our other estimates, but not
wildly different.

10 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Fig. 4. Nonlinear effects of rate gap. Notes: Figure shows coefficients on indicators for 19 ventiles of the rate gap, including both positive and negative values. Specification
otherwise matches Table 2, column 3. The excluded category is zero rate gap, accounting for 19% of the sample. Spikes show 95% confidence intervals.
Source: University of California (UC-CCP).

In the latter specification, all time series variation in 𝑟𝑡 is absorbed by
the fixed effects, and identification comes only from differences in rates
among households that originated (or refinanced) at different times.
Not surprisingly, this has a large effect – standard errors more than
triple, and point estimates shrink – we cannot reject either zero effects
or substantial ones. There is simply little variation in origination rates
with which to identify the effect. As variation in rate lock coming from
different origination times could be correlated to other differences in
cohort characteristics, such as differences in economic experiences or
demographic changes, we find it reassuring that our estimates are not
identified by cross-cohort variation.

The next panel of the table explores alternative samples. We first
limit to mortgages originated before the COVID pandemic, then con-
sider only moves in 2015 and thereafter, and then exclude moves in
2022 and 2023. The first two have only minor impacts on the results.
The final change eliminates the effect, while tripling the standard er-
rors, indicating that our identification comes primarily from the recent
increase in rates (consistent with our above discussion).

Finally, we present two sets of estimates that vary the way that we
calculate an observation’s elapsed duration. These address the concern
that we calculate duration somewhat differently for cash buyers and
mortgage holders in our main results. In the first row of the last panel,
we  re-calculate  duration  for  refinance  observations,  measuring  it  as
time since the household moved into the ZIP rather than as time since
the focal refinance. This makes the refinance measurement more similar
to the way we measure duration for cash buyers. It has little effect on
the results. In the last row, we return to our cash buyer sample, but
expand it to include households who moved into the ZIP code between
2004 and 2013 (where previously we included only post-2013 entrants
in this sample, corresponding to post-2013 mortgage originations in our
main sample). Again, this has little effect. This provides assurance that
measurement differences are not driving the contrasting responsiveness
of mortgage holders and cash buyers.

5.3.  Discussion

In this section, we explore the aggregate implications of mortgage
rate lock. We are particularly interested in two questions. First, how
would aggregate mobility have been different if no households were

locked in — for example, because there had been no rate increase, or
because mortgages were assumable? Second, how large are the costs
of mortgage lock, and how are the costs and benefits distributed? We
answer  these  questions  using  the  estimates  from  the  hazard  model
shown in Table 2 and considering the implications for the population
of mortgage borrowers.

(6)

)
(
exp (−̂𝛾 𝑔𝑐 )

To  calculate  the  effects  of  rate  lock  on  aggregate  mobility,  we
use Eq. (5) to estimate how much higher cohort-specific hazard rates
would have been if mortgage lock were zero. Denoting as 𝜆0
𝑐 cell 𝑐’s
counterfactual hazard rate with no rate lock,
𝜆0
𝑐 = 1 − (1 − 𝜆𝑐 ) exp
where ̂𝛾 is the estimated coefficient on the rate gap. We calculate 𝜆0
𝑐
using the effect on ZIP code mobility from Column (3) of Table 2 for
̂𝛾. Then we aggregate the cell-specific counterfactual mobility rates to
calculate how overall mobility would have been different if rate lock
were zero for all cohorts.36 Appendix Figure B.1 shows the actual and
counterfactual mobility hazards by quarter.37 The effects of rate lock
on mobility hazards vary over time. In 2021q2, when the average rate
gap was essentially zero, both the actual and counterfactual quarterly
ZIP code mobility hazard in our sample were around 1.5 percent. In
2022q2, the counterfactual quarterly mobility hazard was 1.6 percent,
which was 0.16 percentage points above the actual quarterly mobility
hazard  of  1.44  percent.  By  2023q2,  the  counterfactual  and  actual
mobility hazards were 1.72 and 1.45 percent per quarter respectively.
Over the entire last year of our sample, which extends from 2022q3
to  2023q2,  rate  lock  reduced  cumulative  mobility  from  about  7.3%
to  6.1%,  a  decrease  of  about  1.2  percentage  point  or  16  percent.
This amounts to 800,000 moves across ZIP codes that were prevented.

36 This aggregation benefits from the use of a hazard model rather than a
linear probability model for the effect of rate lock — we are able to account
for the fact that a household that is dissuaded from moving in one quarter
remains in the risk pool the following quarter.
37 One implication of the results in Appendix Figure B.1 is that mobility
would have risen in 2022 above its 2020–21 level, but for rate lock. Batzer
et al. (2024) also find increases in counterfactual mobility that were masked
by rate lock, though their rate lock effects are much larger than ours.

11 

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Aggregating over the longer period from the time interest rate hikes
began in mid-2021, around 1,000,000 fewer people with a mortgage
moved than would have if there had been no rate lock.

The magnitude of these estimates implies that aggregate mobility
was reduced by interest rate lock. Because approximately one-quarter
of adults hold mortgages, a decline in quarterly mobility over the last
year  of  the  sample  from  1.85%  to  1.60%  (a  0.25  percentage  point
decline) reduces overall mobility by 0.06 percentage points. On average,
mobility has declined by a bit more than half over the last half century,
or by about 0.017 percentage points per quarter in the quarterly rate.
The decline that we attribute to mortgage lock since 2022q3 acceler-
ated this secular decline by about one year. These calculations leave out
potentially important equilibrium effects coming from lower housing
transaction volumes and higher search costs.

Another  way  to  understand  the  magnitude  of  our  results  is  to
compare them to estimates of the elasticity of migration with respect to
local net-of-tax rates. Head and Mayer (2021) tabulate estimates of this
parameter in their Table B.1. They report a median estimate of 1.63;
estimates for state-to-state mobility in the U.S. are 1.21 (Suárez Serrato
and Zidar, 2016), 1.81 (Moretti and Wilson, 2017), 1.73 (Fajgelbaum
et al., 2019), and 2.69 (Bryan and Morten, 2019). As shown in Fig. 1, by
October 2022, the rate gap in dollar terms reached about 3 percentage
points and over $400 per month. For households moving between July
2022 and June 2023, the average rate gap was about 2.7 percentage
points,  which  corresponded  to  a  difference  in  annual  payments  of
$4928.  Assuming  $5000  is  5%  of  household  income,  our  estimates
imply an elasticity of ZIP code mobility of 15% / 5%, or about 3. If
we instead use our estimated effects on between-state mobility, which
are a bit more than half as large, we obtain an elasticity around 1.5,
very much in line with other studies.

Using  the  mortgage  amortization  formula  and  the  characteristics
of outstanding mortgages, we calculate how much higher each house-
hold’s principal balance would have to be for their monthly payments
to be the same as if they refinanced their actual mortgage at existing
rates. We find that a 2.7 percentage point rate gap is equivalent to a
difference in average mortgage balance value – the ‘‘price’’ of moving –
of $49,400. Our approach to calculating the price of moving implicitly
uses market rates’ embedded expectations about refinancing rates and
the path of future Fed Funds rate movements. An alternative approach
to  calculate  the  costs  of  rate  lock  would  be  to  simulate  the  path
of  future  interest  rates  while  making  assumptions  about  refinancing
behavior.  A  disadvantage  of  this  latter  approach  is  that  it  requires
assumptions about what households will do. Given that fewer than half
of households refinance optimally (Agarwal et al., 2016), we prefer an
approach without that assumption.

Mortgage  lock  creates  deadweight  loss  when  households  are  de-
terred from moving by rate gaps. One way to calculate the deadweight
loss is to consider the demand for moving as a linear function of the
present value of the payment gap. By integrating under the demand
curve  for  moving,  we  can  calculate  the  welfare  losses.  We  assume
that moving demand is linear and decreasing in wealth. Our hazard
estimates imply that in the last year of the sample, around 1.2 per-
centage point more people would have moved if there had been no
rate lock. Together with the wealth decrease we calculate, the decrease
in moving implies a deadweight loss of about $296 per household in
2022q3–2023q2, the last year of the sample. In aggregate, these losses
amount to around $20bn in that year. Our deadweight loss calculation
implicitly includes the costs of all reasons that a household might want
to move yet be deterred from doing so. This is preferable to an approach
based on the effects of a particular motivation for moving, e.g., for a
new job, as that would underestimate the overall costs of rate lock.

Another effect of rate lock is that households who do move must pay
higher rates. The $49,400 difference in present values is a pure transfer
from households to the banking system which would be saved if house-
holds could retain their mortgage after moving. Since 6.1% of sample

12 

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

households  moved  in  the  last  year  of  the  sample,  the  monthly  per-
household cost was around $315 per household, implying a present-
value balance transfer to the banking system worth $3160 per house-
hold. In aggregate, the costs amount to $21bn per month in mortgage
payments, or a balance transfer worth $215bn in total.

6.  Concluding remarks

We  estimate  that  interest  rate  lock  has  a  substantial  effect  on
individuals’ propensity to move ZIP codes. Our preferred specification
is a hazard specification that models ZIP code moving probability as
a function of the gap between the rate a household is paying for its
mortgage and the current prevailing mortgage rate. The hazard model
implicitly controls for the baseline hazard rate, which is modeled as a
function of the time since a household has a mortgage.

Our preferred estimates come from instrumental variables models
which instrument for the interest rate on a mortgage using the prevail-
ing rate at the time of mortgage origination. The IV specifications show
that each percentage point increase in the gap between the mortgage’s
rates and prevailing rates reduces mobility between 5% and 8%. When
we repeat the specifications for homeowners without mortgages, the
estimates are much smaller. Therefore we think that macroeconomic
conditions or other omitted variables do not explain our results.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jack Liebersohn: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project admin-
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Jesse Rothstein: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources,
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal  analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103973.

Data availability

Data for ‘‘Household Mobility and Mortgage Rate Lock’’ (Reference da
ta) (Mendeley Data)

References

Agarwal, S., Rosen, R.J., Yao, V., 2016. Why do borrowers make mortgage refinancing

mistakes? Manage. Sci. 62 (12), 3494–3509.

Aladangady, A., 2017. Housing wealth and consumption: evidence from geographically

linked microdata. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (11), 3415–3446.

Andersen, S., Campbell, J.Y., Nielsen, K.M., Ramadorai, T., 2020. Sources of inaction in
household finance: Evidence from the danish mortgage market. Amer. Econ. Rev.
110 (10), 3184–3230.

Andersson, F., Mayock, T., 2014. How does home equity affect mobility? J. Urban

Econ. 84, 23–39.

J. Urban Econ. 129, 103438.

Atalay, K., Edwards, R., 2022. House prices, housing wealth and financial well-being.

Batzer,  R.,  Coste,  J.,  Doerner,  W.,  Seiler,  M.,  2024.  The  Lock-In  Effect  of  Rising

Mortgage Rates. FHFA Staff Working Paper Series.

J. Liebersohn and J. Rothstein

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103973 

Bernstein,  A.,  Struyven,  D.,  2022.  Housing  lock:  Dutch  evidence  on  the  impact  of
negative home equity on household mobility. Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 14 (3),
1–32.

Bolhuis, M.A., Cramer, J.N.L., Schulz, K.O., Summers, L.H., 2024. The Cost of Money
is Part of the Cost of Living: New Evidence on the Consumer Sentiment Anomaly.
Working Paper 32163, National Bureau of Economic Research, http://dx.doi.org/
10.3386/w32163, URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w32163.

Brown, J.R., Cookson, J.A., Heimer, R.Z., 2019. Growing up without finance. J. Financ.

Econ. 134 (3), 591–616.

Goodman, L., Ratcliffe, J., Neal, M., Choi, J.H., Zhu, L., Walsh, J., Young, C., Pang, D.,
Zinn,  A.,  Visalli,  K.,  Mehrotra,  A.,  Rincon,  A.,  Neeley-Bertrand,  D.,  Hill,  T.,
Barcus,  A.,  2023.  Housing  Finance  At  A  Glance:  A  Monthly  Chartbook,  May
2023.  Technical  Report,  Urban  Institute,  URL https://www.urban.org/research/
publication/housing-finance-glance-monthly-chartbook-may-2023.

Hanushek, E.A., Quigley, J.M., 1978. An explicit model of intra-metropolitan mobility.

Land Econom. 54 (4), 411–429.

Head, K., Mayer, T., 2021. The United States of Europe: a gravity model evaluation of

the four freedoms. J. Econ. Perspect. 35 (2), 23–48.

Bryan, G., Morten, M., 2019. The aggregate productivity effects of internal migration:

Holmes, N., 2021. CalExodus: Are People Leaving California? Policy Brief, California

Evidence from Indonesia. J. Polit. Econ. 127 (5), 2229–2268.

Policy Lab.

Cattaneo, M.D., Crump, R.K., Farrell, M.H., Feng, Y., 2024. On binscatter. Amer. Econ.

Holmes, N., White, E., 2022. Pandemic Patterns: California Is Seeing Fewer Entrances

Rev. 114 (5), 1488–1514.

and More Exits. Policy Brief, California Policy Lab.

Chaney, T., Sraer, D., Thesmar, D., 2012. The collateral channel: How real estate shocks

Molloy, R., Trezzi, R., Smith, C.L., Wozniak, A., 2016. Understanding declining fluidity

affect corporate investment. Amer. Econ. Rev. 102 (6), 2381–2409.

Fajgelbaum, P.D., Morales, E., Suárez Serrato, J.C., Zidar, O., 2019. State taxes and

spatial misallocation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 86 (1), 333–376.

Ferreira, F., 2010. You can take it with you: Proposition 13 tax benefits, residential
mobility, and willingness to pay for housing amenities. J. Public Econ. 94 (9–10),
661–673.

Ferreira, F., Gyourko, J., Tracy, J., 2010. Housing busts and household mobility. J.

Urban Econ. 68 (1), 34–45.

Ferreira, F., Gyourko, J., Tracy, J., 2011. Housing Busts and Household Mobility: An

Update. Working Paper 17405, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fonseca, J., Liu, L., 2024. Mortgage Lock-In, Mobility, and Labor Reallocation. Working

Paper.

across US housing downturns. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 60, 292–299.

Gerardi, K., Willen, P.S., Zhang, D.H., 2023. Mortgage prepayment, race, and monetary

policy. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (3), 498–524.

in the US labor market. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 2016 (1), 183–259.

Moretti, E., Wilson, D.J., 2017. The effect of state taxes on the geographical location of
top earners: Evidence from star scientists. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (7), 1858–1903.
Munch, J.R., Svarer, M., 2002. Rent control and tenancy duration. J. Urban Econ. 52

(3), 542–560.

Palmer,  C.J.,  2022.  An  IV  Hazard  Model  of  Loan  Default  with  an  Application  to

Subprime Mortgage Cohorts. Working Paper.

Quigley,  J.M.,  1987.  Interest  rate  variations,  mortgage  prepayments  and  household

mobility. Rev. Econ. Stat. 636–643.

Quigley, J.M., 2002. Homeowner mobility and mortgage interest rates: new evidence

from the 1990s. Real Estate Econ. 30 (3), 345–365.

Shahidinejad, A., 2023. Are (Nonprofit) Banks Special? The Economic Effects of Banking

Suárez Serrato, J.C., Zidar, O., 2016. Who benefits from state corporate tax cuts? A
local labor markets approach with heterogeneous firms. Amer. Econ. Rev. 106 (9),
2582–2624.

Venti, S.F., Wise, D.A., 1984. Moving and housing expenditure: transaction costs and

disequilibrium. J. Public Econ. 23 (1–2), 207–243.

Foote, A., 2016. The effects of negative house price changes on migration: Evidence

with Credit Unions. Working Paper.

13 

