Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The impact of impact investing✩
Jonathan B. Berk a,b,∗, Jules H. van Binsbergen c,b,d
a Stanford University, United States of America
b NBER, United States of America
c University of Pennsylvania, United States of America
d CEPR

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Berk, Jonathan; van Binsbergen, J
ules (2024), ‘‘Impact of Impact Investing’’, Men
deley Data, V1, doi: 10.17632/gzp97wdddc.1

Keywords:
ESG
Cost of Capital
Real Investment
Divestment

The change in the cost of capital that results from a divestiture strategy can be closely approximated by a
simple function of three parameters: (1) the fraction of socially conscious capital, (2) the fraction of targeted
firms in the economy and (3) the return correlation between the targeted firms and the rest of the stock
market. When calibrated to current data, we demonstrate that the impact on the cost of capital is too small
to meaningfully affect real investment decisions. We then derive the conditions that would be required for
the strategy to have a meaningful impact. We empirically corroborate our theoretical results by studying firm
changes in ESG status and are unable to detect an impact of ESG divestiture strategies on the cost of capital of
treated firms. Our results suggest that to have impact, instead of divesting, socially conscious investors should
invest and exercise their rights of control to change corporate policy.

Socially  conscious  investing  aims  to  reduce  social  and  environ-
mental costs in society through investment choice. Divestment is an
important tool investors employ to achieve this goal. Broadly defined,
divestment is the idea that when investors refuse to invest in compa-
nies that impose social and environmental costs, society benefits. As
plausible as this argument appears to be at first blush, it is missing
the mechanism linking investor action and the effect on society. What
is not clear is how divestment affects corporate strategy. Why would
investors’ choice to divest achieve the stated goal of reducing social
costs in society?

When an investor chooses to sell a stock like a tobacco company,
she necessarily sells it to another investor. Since this transaction simply
exchanges one investor for another, it cannot directly impact how the
company does business. There are, however, two possible ways the di-
vestment decision can indirectly affect the company’s business strategy.
One way is for the new owners to exercise their rights of control. But
since the impact of divesting is to effectively swap shareholders who
care about social and environmental costs for other shareholders, it is
hard to see why the new shareholders would be any more disposed to
exercising their control rights for the good of society than the old ones.

Alternatively, when a socially conscious shareholder sells her stake
to another shareholder, the new shareholder needs to be induced into
buying shares in the company. This inducement comes in the form of
a lower price. The lower price implies a higher cost of capital which
affects the company’s future real investment strategy by lowering the
number of positive net present value (NPV) investment opportunities,
thus lowering the company’s growth rate. The opposite is true when
a  socially  conscious  shareholder  chooses  to  buy.  The  extra  demand
for clean companies increases the price of those companies, lowering
the cost of capital and thus increasing their growth rates. In the long
term,  socially  desirable  companies  become  a  larger  fraction  of  the
economy  at  the  expense  of  socially  undesirable  companies  and  the
social and environmental costs on society are reduced. Therefore, for
this  mechanism  to  have  impact,  it  is  essential  that  the  divestment
strategy  results  in  a  large  enough  change  in  the  cost  of  capital  to
materially affect the firm’s investment opportunity set.

Our objective in this paper is to evaluate the impact of divestiture
initiatives in secondary markets by determining whether or not they
have materially affected the cost of capital and, if not, whether they

✩
Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank Jiayi Cheng and Jiarui (Andy) Su for outstanding research assistance and Greg Brown,
Greg Buchak, Peter DeMarzo, Tyler Muir, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Christian Opp, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Monika Piazzesi, Amit Seru and seminar participants at
the Jackson Hole Finance Group, Stanford GSB, Amsterdam Business School, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Washington University, EDHEC, NYU Law, ICPM,
Inquire Europe, the University of Bristol, the Guanghua School of Management, the University of Zurich, and the GMU LEC Research Roundtable for their helpful
comments. The research associated with this writing was partially funded by the Law & Economics Center at the George Mason University Antonin Scalia Law
School. The opinions expressed here are the authors’ alone and do not represent the official position of the Law & Economics Center, George Mason University.

∗ Stanford University, United States of America.

E-mail address:

jbberk@stanford.edu (J.B. Berk).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103972
Received 3 February 2023; Received in revised form 7 November 2024; Accepted 8 November 2024
Available online 2 December 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

are likely to do so in the future. We begin by first calculating, given
current market conditions, the predicted impact of socially responsible
investing  on  the  cost  of  capital.  Under  the  common  assumption  of
mean–variance preferences, we demonstrate that the change in the cost
of capital can be closely approximated by a simple formula. If socially
conscious investors choose to target a set of companies that make up 𝑓
fraction of the economy and the correlation between these companies
and the rest of the market is 𝜌, then a divestment strategy will lead to
a change in the cost of capital of

MRP ×

( Socially Conscious Investor Wealth
Rest of Investor Wealth

)

× 𝑓 × (1 − 𝜌2),

where MRP is the market risk premium. We estimate, using ESG mutual
fund  data,  that 𝑓 is  27%  and 𝜌 is  0.93.  Further,  we  estimate  that
currently  socially  conscious  wealth  makes  up  less  than  2%  of  stock
market wealth in the United States. Using a market risk premium of
6% leads to an estimated change in the cost of capital of 0.44 basis
points. Given the uncertainty in the capital budgeting process, half a
basis point cannot meaningfully impact firms’ investment strategies.

We  then  show  that  the  data  is  consistent  with  this  theoretical
prediction. Even with the growth in the popularity of impact investing
in the last 10 years, we find that the difference in the cost of capital
between firms that are targeted for their social or environmental costs
and  firms  that  are  not,  is  small  and  not  statistically  different  from
zero. Specifically, we study the effect of a firm either being included
or excluded from the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index. The stocks in
this index are a subset of the FTSE USA Index, and so the inclusion
and exclusion events are driven by changes in the ESG status of the
firm. In addition, this index is replicated by the world’s largest socially
responsible  index  fund,  the  Vanguard  FTSE  Social  Index  Fund.  The
advantage of this approach over existing approaches is that our results
do  not  rely  on  the  assumption  that  the  risk  of  the  firm  is  correctly
measured.

We  also  investigate  the  sensitivity  of  our  results  to  the  specific
assumptions  in  our  model.  First,  some  readers  are  concerned  that
our baseline model does not feature investors who effectively do not
participate in the price setting process because they are constrained (or
mandated) to a passive buy-and-hold strategy. We show that at current
ESG participation rates, to have a meaningful effect of 1% on the cost
of capital, 98% of investors would need to be constrained in this way.
Second,  we  do  not  explicitly  model  investor  preference  over  social
outcomes. Instead, we only consider the extreme case where socially
conscious investors refuse to hold any firm that imposes social costs. In
that sense, our results can be viewed as an upper bound on the effect
of investors with ‘‘Warm Glow’’ preferences who trade off the financial
benefits of investing in these firms against the social costs. Finally, we
have calibrated the model to other indices like the MSCI ESG Aware
Index, and have found quantitatively similar results.

We then consider the question of what it would take for a divest-
ment strategy to successfully impact firm investment. To effect a more
than 1% change in the cost of capital, impact investors would need
to make up more than 80% of all investable wealth. Given the low
likelihood of achieving such a high participation rate, the results in this
paper raise the question of whether divestment in secondary markets
is the most effective strategy to achieve social good.

The reason divestiture in secondary markets has so little impact is
that stocks are highly substitutable, and socially costly stocks make up
less than half of the economy. It therefore does not take much of a
price change to induce an investor who does not care about the social
costs to hold more of a stock than they otherwise would. To put this
in the language of modern finance, when socially responsible investors
divest, they must induce other investors to move away from their fully
diversified portfolio. But because the fraction of stocks that are subject
to divestment is small relative to the supply of investable capital, and
diversified stock portfolios are highly correlated with each other, the
new portfolio is only slightly less diversified than the old one. So the

new investors do not demand much of an increase in their expected
return. Thus, the effect on the cost of capital is small. The only way to
materially affect this basic trade-off is if a large majority of investors
choose to divest. In this case, because the shareholders that must hold
the targeted (dirty) stocks comprise only a small minority of sharehold-
ers, they must be induced to hold a more highly concentrated portfolio
which  materially  affects  their  overall  diversification.  In  equilibrium,
this causes a larger price impact.

Contrast this strategy with an investment in the primary market.
If an investor chooses to fund an otherwise unfunded negative NPV
investment opportunity, the reaction of other investors is irrelevant. By
funding the negative NPV investment, the investor can achieve social
good even when all other investors are indifferent to social outcomes.
Notice  that  this  insight  is  limited  to  negative  NPV  primary  market
investments only. If an investor chooses to ‘‘divest’’ in primary markets
by choosing not to fund a positive NPV investment opportunity (that has
social costs) she will have little effect if other investors exist who chase
positive NPV projects.

By the same token, if the same agent engages in a negative NPV
investment  in  the  secondary  market  by  overpaying  for  a  stock,  this
extra value accrues to the seller of the stock and so this action has
no  direct  effect  on  the  firm’s  investment  strategies.  Similarly,  if  the
agent decides to sell her stake in a company that engages in socially
undesirable investments at a discount, the extra value will go to the
person purchasing the stake. These secondary market actions can only
indirectly affect social outcomes by changing the terms of trade. The
extent to which the terms of trade are affected depends crucially on
the reaction of other investors. If many other investors are willing to
step in (because they are attracted to the positive NPV opportunity),
the effect on the price will be minimal resulting in little impact on the
terms of trade. This distinction between primary and secondary markets
is crucial because it implies that a much higher degree of participation
is required to achieve social change using the secondary market rather
than the primary market.

In summary, because of the reaction of other investors, at current
levels of participation, the impact of socially motivated divestment in
the secondary market is small. Furthermore, the degree of participation
that would be required to have meaningful impact is implausibly high.
Our  conclusion  is  that  to  have  impact,  socially  conscious  investors
should use the primary market (what people often term ‘‘impact in-
vesting’’) rather than the secondary market. Alternatively, instead of
divesting, investors could invest and use their stakes to exercise their
control  rights.  By  taking  a  substantive  equity  position  in  firms  that
impose social costs, socially conscious investors could achieve social
good  through  the  proxy  process  or by gaining  a majority stake  and
replacing upper management. We estimate that the set of companies
that are targeted by all socially conscious funds comprise only 27% of
the market, so successfully implementing this strategy would require a
substantially smaller fraction of investable wealth than the fraction of
wealth required for a divestiture strategy to succeed.

1.  Background

This paper fits into a sizable literature that studies socially conscious
investing.1 In this paper, our focus is on divestment in secondary mar-
kets. One of the earliest papers that studies the effect of a divestment
strategy is Teoh et al. (1999) who fail to detect any effect of divestment
in South African stocks during apartheid. Later papers generally docu-
mented an excess return for holding ‘‘sin’’ stocks, usually companies
in the tobacco, alcohol, fossil fuels, weapons and gaming industries,
suggesting  that  divestment  might  have  affected  the  returns  in  these

1 Brest et al. (2018), in an article intended for a law review audience, survey
the entire impact investing landscape. There is also a practitioner literature on
the subject, see Cornell (2020) and the references therein.

2 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

industries.2 More recent work has found contradictory results, that is,
that ‘‘clean’’ stocks outperform ‘‘sin’’ stocks.3 The main issue with this
line of research is that the stocks of interest are highly concentrated in
a few industries that likely have risk-based reasons for returns different
to the market. Thus the ‘‘sin’’ premium could well be attributable to risk
not correctly adjusted for in these papers.4 There are two advantages
of our empirical approach relative to this literature. First, our approach
does not require us to take a stance on the risk model. All we require
is the much weaker assumption that a decision by the firm to change
its social policy is not correlated with changes in the firm’s riskiness.
Second, we use the price response to a policy change as a measure
of the effect on the cost of capital, which is easier to detect than the
concomitant change in the expected return.

Other confounding factors to consider are that in the early sample
period (1960’s to early 2000’s) there was very little organized pressure
to divest (other than in the case of South Africa) while studies using
more  recent  data  have  failed  to  find  the  effect  (Mollet  and  Ziegler,
2014; Trinks  et  al., 2018).  The  effect  is  also  not  consistent  across
localities, as documented in Durand et al. (2013), who attribute the
differences to ‘‘cultural norms’’, and Feng et al. (2015).5 More funda-
mentally, given the level of uncertainty in returns, detecting changes in
expected returns is challenging given the short time span over which
socially conscious criteria have come to effect investment choices.

The first paper that theoretically models how a divestiture strategy
affects corporate behavior is Heinkel et al. (2001). The paper models an
equilibrium where the investment behavior of ESG investors raises the
cost of capital of polluting firms and lowers the cost of capital for green
firms. Firms then endogenously choose to become green by paying a
cost. In equilibrium this cost leaves the marginal firm indifferent. The
model provides a rich set of predictions and insights but, as is often
the case with rich models, has the disadvantage that it does not yield
a simple characterization of the equilibrium. Although the authors do
not formally calibrate their model, they illustrate their equilibrium with
a numerical example. Unfortunately, because the parameter choices in
the numerical example were selected to best illustrate the tradeoffs in
the  model,  the  example appears  to  have  left  subsequent  researchers
with the impression that the effect on the cost of capital is large enough
to induce a significant fraction of firms to choose to pay the cost to
become green. Of course, at the time the paper was written, impact
investing was in its infancy and so the data to properly calibrate their
model likely did not exist. As we show in this paper, with the benefit
of an extra twenty years of data, when properly calibrated to current
market conditions, the effect on the cost of capital is too small to be
consequential.6

Like  us, Luo  and  Balvers (2017)  study  the  theoretical  effect  of
divestment in a single period mean–variance environment. They derive
a boycott factor risk premium and show that it is positive. They do
not  calibrate  the  size  of  the  premium.  In  the  empirical  section  of
their paper, they estimate the boycott factor risk premium to be 16%
per  annum.  Our  results  suggest  that  this  large  estimated  premium
is unlikely to represent the effect of ESG preferences broadly and is
likely more characteristic of the sample period and the choice of sin
industries.

A  number  of  other  papers  derive  equilibrium  models  that  fea-
ture  ESG  investors,  although  they  do  not  focus  on  the  question  of

2 See Hong  and  Kacperczyk (2009), Chava (2014), Ghoul  et  al. (2011),
Fabozzi  et  al. (2008), Statman  and  Glushkov (2016), Barber  et  al. (2021),
Derwall and Verwijmeren (2007) and Salaber (2013) and references therein.
3 See, for example, Pastor et al. (2021) who argue that this empirical finding
is just an ex-post realization rather than indicative of the true expected return.

4 See Blitz and Fabozzi (2017).
5 Renneboog et al. (2008) provide a review of the evidence in the literature

on the effectiveness of impact investing.

6 In a followup paper, Barnea et al. (2005), endogenize firm investment and

study how total investment is affected by divestiture.

whether  the  actions  of  ESG  investors  achieve  socially  desirable  out-
comes. Pedersen et al. (2020) derive a model that includes investors
whose preferences depend on ESG scores. The focus of that paper is
characterizing the equilibrium and then using it to provide insight on
optimal  portfolio  choice.  In  their  setting,  optimal  portfolios  can  be
spanned by four funds, thereby providing a practical methodology to
choose optimal portfolios in a world that features ESG investors. The
paper does not address the question of whether the actions of ESG in-
vestors actually achieve social good. Dam and Scholtens (2015) derive
an equilibrium model of firm behavior, but since the cost of capital is
assumed fixed at the risk free rate in their model, it is not obvious why
firms care about investor preferences in that model. Presumably the
authors have in mind that investors exercise their unmodeled control
rights. Pástor et al. (2020) also derive a model featuring agents with
ESG preferences and study the security market line in this environment.
That paper does not assess the magnitude of the effect on the cost of
capital of introducing ESG investors into the economy. Avramov et al.
(2021) study the effect of ESG uncertainty on the ESG profile of firms
in a similar model.

One implication of our paper is that investors are likely to be more
effective in reducing social costs by investing, rather than divesting, in
socially costly firms and using their rights of control to alter corporate
policy. Dimson  et  al. (2015)  provide  empirical  evidence  supporting
the effectiveness of this alternative strategy. Broccardo et al. (2020)
explicitly model the choice between investing and divesting. Although
their focus is slightly different from ours (Broccardo et al., 2020 study
the individual decision to follow a particular investment strategy taking
as  given  what  other  investors  do)  they  reach  the  same  conclusion
we  do.  They  show  that  the  incentives  of  individuals  to  join  an  exit
strategy are not necessarily aligned with social incentives, while they
are aligned when investors invest and use their rights of control.

An important conclusion of our paper is that the primary market is
likely to be a more effective place to achieve beneficial social outcomes.
But with that said, competition in the primary market is an important
determinant of the effectiveness of the strategy, a point emphasized
in Oehmke  and  Opp (2023)  who  study  the  effectiveness  of  primary
investment in a market with perfect investor competition so capital for
positive NPV investment is in infinite supply. To achieve social good,
investing in firms with no social externalities is suboptimal (because
those projects would be financed anyway)— to achieve social change
in equilibrium it is important for socially conscious investors to fund
firms  that  are  imposing  social  costs,  that  is,  to  fund  more  socially
desirable  (negative  NPV)  investments  at  firms  that  otherwise  would
impose higher social costs.

A recent paper that studies the effect of improving social outcomes
by direct investment in the primary market is Dangl et al. (2023). The
relative cost of capital between green and brown firms is unaffected by
the social preferences of agents in that model. However, firms issue
shares  on  the  primary  market  to  finance  investment.  Because  firm
managers in that model anticipate agents’ investment choices, socially
conscious  agents’  investment  decisions  in  the  primary  market  affect
corporate policy. Consistent with this evidence, Krueger et al. (2020)
survey institutional investors and find that they consider engagement
rather  then  divestment  to  be  a  more  effective  approach  to  address
climate risks.

Given  the  ineffectiveness  of  divestiture,  a  natural  question  that
arises is why investors engage in the strategy at all. One possibility
is that investors either do not realize that the strategy is ineffective
or derive utility from the strategy without regard to its effectiveness.
Another possibility is that investors use the strategy to signal ‘‘good
behavior’’. Riedl and Smeets (2017) provide evidence that supports this
latter hypothesis.

Our work is closely related to the literature that studies index in-
clusion effects.7 At first blush our results might seem inconsistent with

7 See Shleifer (1986) and Harris and Gurel (1986).

3 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

this literature that documents seemingly large price changes resulting
from demand effects. In fact, we show that our model is also able to
explain the observed index inclusion effects. Greenwood and Sammon
(2022) show that in the most recent decade, the price inclusion effect
into the S&P500 Index is 0.3%.8 In Section 3 we calibrate our model
to this number and show that the demand elasticities implied by our
model are fully consistent with the index inclusion effects observed in
the data. More importantly, the cost of capital is a long-term rate that is
unaffected by short term price effects. Only the permanent component
of a price change affects the cost of capital while many of the demand
effects  documented  in  the  literature  have  been  shown  to  be  largely
temporary — most of this effect mean reverts within a short period
of time (as Harris and Gurel (1986) document).

2.  The model

To  assess  the  impact  of  divestment,  we  start  with  a  frictionless
economy in which the workhorse model in financial economics, the
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) holds.9 We assume that investors
are homogeneous with mean–variance preferences.10 That is, if 𝑅𝑝 is
the return of their portfolios and 𝜎2
𝑝 is the variance of this return, then
all investors select their portfolios by solving:
max 𝐸[𝑅𝑝] − 𝑘𝜎2
𝑝 ,

where 𝑘 measures investors’ risk appetites.

Although  the  CAPM  applies  to  all  investments,  in  this  paper  we
will focus on the cost of capital implied by equity markets, which is
where most of the ESG focus has been. Of course, firms have several
other sources of financing, such as public debt markets, banks, as well
as internally generated funds. Including other margins of adjustment
in  our  computations  would  weaken  the  effects  of  equity  divestment
initiatives on real investment decisions. Thus, our results represent an
upper bound on the effect of ESG investors in the equity market.

To  model  the  divestiture  strategy,  we  then  allow  a  subset  of  in-
vestors to have ESG preferences in that they will only hold clean stocks,
for simplicity, ESG investors.11 We divide the stocks in the economy into
two sets, the set of clean stocks that satisfy ESG requirements that ESG
investors have, and the rest. For convenience we refer to the set of
remaining stocks as dirty stocks, although it should be emphasized that
the choice of this term is not supposed to be pejorative. Rather, the
term is shorthand for the complement of the clean stocks.

In  this  single  period  economy,  all  investors  are  endowed  with  a
share of the market portfolio. They trade at the beginning of the period
and consume the liquidating dividend that stocks pay out at the end of
the period. The cumulative dividend payout of all stocks is denoted 𝐷.
We adopt the price normalization that the price of holding all stocks is
1, implying that the return of the market portfolio is 𝑅 = 𝐷 − 1. The
market portfolio consists of two portfolios, the clean portfolio and the
dirty portfolio. Let 𝐷𝐸 be the cumulative liquidating dividend paid to
all investors holding shares in the clean portfolio. Similarly, 𝐷𝐷 is the
cumulative liquidating dividend paid to all investors holding shares in
the dirty portfolio, implying 𝐷𝐸 + 𝐷𝐷 = 𝐷. Denote the value at the
beginning of the period of the clean stock portfolio (the total amount
of wealth invested in the portfolio) as 𝑉𝐸 and the value of the dirty

8 Bennett et al. (2020) also investigate the impact on firms of joining the
S&P 500 Index from 1997 to 2017. They find that the positive announcement
effect  on  the  stock  price  of  index  inclusion  over  this  sample  period  has
disappeared and even argue that the long-run impact of index inclusion has
become negative.

9 The  CAPM  was  developed  by Sharpe (1964), Mossin (1966), Lintner

(1965) and Treynor (1961).
10 Berk (1997) provides the necessary and sufficient conditions that imply
mean–variance maximization.
11 These preferences represent the extreme case — investors refuse to hold
any stock that does social harm rather than just tilting away from such stocks.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

stock  portfolio  as 𝑉𝐷,  implying,  under  the  price  normalization,  that
𝑉𝐸 +𝑉𝐷 = 1. Thus, under the price normalization, 𝑉𝐸 can be interpreted
as the fraction of market value that the clean stock portfolio makes up,
and 𝑉𝐷 is the fraction of market value that the dirty stock portfolio
makes up. The return of these two portfolios is therefore 𝑅𝐸 = 𝐷𝐸
− 1
𝑉𝐸
and 𝑅𝐷 = 𝐷𝐷
− 1 and the price normalization implies that the market
𝑉𝐷
return is
𝑅 = 𝐷𝐸 + 𝐷𝐷 − 1,

with expectation
̄𝑅 = 𝐸[𝑅] = ̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 1,

where we adopt the notation throughout the paper that a bar over a
random variable denotes its expectation.

Next, define the following second moment primitives:

𝜎2
𝐷
𝜎2
𝐸
𝜎𝐸 𝐷

≡ 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐷𝐷)
≡ 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐷𝐸 )
≡ 𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝐷𝐸 , 𝐷𝐷)

𝜎2 ≡ 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐷) = 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐷𝐷 + 𝐷𝐸 ) = 𝜎2

𝐷 + 𝜎2

𝐸 + 2𝜎𝐷 𝐸 = 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑅)

𝜌 ≡

𝜎𝐸 𝐷
𝜎𝐷𝜎𝐸

=

𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅𝐸 , 𝑅𝐷)
𝑠𝑡𝑑(𝑅𝐷)𝑠𝑡𝑑(𝑅𝐸 )

.

Notice that because of the price normalization, the cash flow variance
of the market is the same as the return variance. Because of the nature
of correlations, the cash flow correlation between dirty and clean stocks
is the same as the return correlation. Finally, we assume that a risk free
asset in zero net supply exists with return 𝑟 which will be determined
in equilibrium.

2.1.  Equilibrium with ESG investors

We begin by solving for the equilibrium. The total wealth of ESG
investors is denoted 𝛾, implying under the price normalization, that
the total wealth of the rest of investors is 1 − 𝛾. Because ESG investors
will  not  hold  dirty  stocks,  in  equilibrium  they  hold  the  tangency
portfolio of clean stocks on the constrained mean–variance frontier that
includes only clean stocks. This tangency portfolio defines the clean
stock portfolio, and the dirty portfolio is then defined as the portfolio
that combined with the clean portfolio gives the market portfolio.12
So, the ESG investors’ equilibrium allocation is 𝑒 fraction of the clean
portfolio given by their budget constraint:

𝛾 = 𝑉𝐸 𝑒 + 𝑏,

where 𝑏 is the total wealth ESG investors invest in the risk free asset
(implying that other investors invest −𝑏 in the risk free asset). Solving
for 𝑒 gives

𝑒 =

𝛾 − 𝑏
𝑉𝐸

.

(1)

Because ESG investors hold a constrained portfolio, the portfolio
that  prices  assets  is  the  portfolio  held  by  the  other  investors.  This
portfolio, that is, the mean–variance efficient portfolio, is the tangency
portfolio on the unconstrained mean–variance efficient frontier of risky
assets. The rest of investors’ wealth invested in risky assets is given by
𝑉𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒)𝑉𝐸 ,

which implies that their portfolio weights are (using (1)):
𝑉𝐷
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

𝑉𝐷
𝑉𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒)𝑉𝐸

𝜔𝐷 =

=

12 If  the  market  portfolio  is  on  the  mean–variance  efficient  frontier  of
risky assets, then the dirty portfolio will contain only dirty stocks, and both
portfolios will consist of the renormalized market weights of the clean and
dirty sets. Otherwise, the dirty portfolio will also contain clean stocks.

4 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

in the dirty portfolio and
(1 − 𝑒)𝑉𝐸
𝑉𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒)𝑉𝐸

𝜔𝐸 =

=

𝑉𝐸 − 𝛾 + 𝑏
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

in the clean portfolio. Thus the return of the mean–variance efficient
portfolio, 𝑅𝑚𝑣 is

𝑅𝑚𝑣 = 𝜔𝐷𝑅𝐷 + 𝜔𝐸 𝑅𝐸 =

𝐷𝐷 + 𝐷𝐸
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

− 1 −

=

𝐷𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒)𝐷𝐸
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

− 1.

𝐷𝐸
𝑉𝐸

( 𝛾 − 𝑏

)

1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

(2)

(3)

≡ 𝜎2

𝐸 +𝜌𝜎𝐷𝜎𝐸
𝜎2

≡ 𝜎2

𝐷+𝜌𝜎𝐷𝜎𝐸
𝜎2

Let 𝛴𝐸

and 𝛴𝐷

(the cash flow betas of the
two portfolios), implying that 𝛴𝐸 + 𝛴𝐷 = 1. In Appendix A we derive
the equilibrium returns in this economy. There we show that the return
beta (with respect to the mean–variance efficient portfolio), 𝛽𝐸 , of the
clean portfolio is
(
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏
𝑉𝐸

𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜎2
𝐸
𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸

𝛽𝐸 =

(4)

)

,

and the beta of the dirty portfolio, 𝛽𝐷 is

(

𝛽𝐷 =

1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏
𝑉𝐷

𝛴𝐷𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜌𝜎𝐷𝜎𝐸
𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸

)

.

(5)

Using these expressions and the expressions derived in Appendix A
for the risk free rate, we derive, in the appendix, equilibrium prices
using  the  security  market  line  defined  by  the  above  mean–variance
efficient portfolio:

̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛴𝐸
̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (1 + 𝛤 )
̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤 )
̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (1 + 𝛤 )

𝑉𝐸 =

𝑉𝐷 =

where

𝛤 ≡

( 𝛾

)

1 − 𝛾

(1 − 𝜌2)

𝜎2
𝐷
𝜎2

.

(6)

Using these prices we then compute expected returns as a function of
the market betas of the two portfolios, 𝛽𝑚
𝐷
̄𝑅𝐸 = ̄𝑅 + 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛽𝑚
)
𝐸 − (1 + 𝛤 )
(
(
̄𝑅𝐷 = ̄𝑅 + 2𝑘𝜎2
𝛽𝑚
𝐷 −

and 𝛽𝑚
𝐸

≡ 𝛴𝐷
𝑉𝐷

≡ 𝛴𝐸
𝑉𝐸

1 − 𝛤

))

:

.

𝑉𝐸
𝑉𝐷

The difference in the expected return of dirty and clean stocks, 𝛥 ̄𝑅, is
then given by

𝛥 ̄𝑅 ≡ ̄𝑅𝐷 − ̄𝑅𝐸 = 2𝑘𝜎2

(

𝛽𝑚
𝐷 − 𝛽𝑚

𝐸 +

𝛤
𝑉𝐷

)

.

(7)

2.2.  Equilibrium without ESG investors

To assess the effect of ESG investors, we now derive the equilibrium
when all investors are identical and do not have ESG preferences. To
differentiate this equilibrium from the equilibrium with ESG investors,
we will mark the equilibrium variables with asterisks. In this standard
CAPM equilibrium, all investors choose to hold the market portfolio,
which is mean–variance efficient. As we show in Appendix B, the value
and expected returns of the two portfolios are now given by

𝑉 ∗
𝐸 =

𝑉 ∗
𝐷 =

̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐸 𝜎2
̄𝐷𝐷 + ̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2
̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐷𝜎2
̄𝐷𝐷 + ̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2
𝛴𝐸
𝑉 ∗
𝐸
𝛴𝐷
𝑉 ∗
𝐷

1 −

1 −

(

(

𝐸 = ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2
̄𝑅∗

𝐷 = ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2
̄𝑅∗

)

)

.

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

So the difference in the cost of capital between clean and dirty stocks
is

𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≡ ̄𝑅∗

where 𝛽∗

𝐷 − ̄𝑅∗
𝐷 = 𝛴𝐷
𝑉 ∗
𝐷

𝐸 = 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛽∗
𝐸 = 𝛴𝐸
and 𝛽∗
𝑉 ∗
𝐸

𝐷 − 𝛽∗
𝐸

) ,

(8)

are the (market) betas of the portfolios.

3.  Effect on the cost of capital of ESG investors

To study the effect of introducing ESG investors, we will assume
that all investors are initially identical and hold the market portfolio.
A portion of them then acquire ESG preferences and trade to the ESG
equilibrium. Eq. (7) is the difference in the cost of capital between clean
and dirty stocks after a portion of investors acquire ESG preferences and
(8) is the difference in the cost of capital before the existence of ESG
investors. The difference between the two is therefore the effect of ESG
investors on the cost of capital.

Although the market betas of the portfolios are not the same in the
two economies, we show in Appendix C that this difference is second
order, and so the difference in the cost of capital due to the presence
of ESG investors is approximated by the difference between (7) and (8)
assuming the betas are the same:
𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≈ 2𝑘𝜎2 𝛤
𝑉𝐷

= 2𝑘𝜎2𝑉𝐷

= 2𝑘𝜎2𝑉𝐷

≈ 2𝑘𝜎2𝑉𝐷

( 𝛾

)

1 − 𝛾

)

)

( 𝛾

1 − 𝛾

( 𝛾

1 − 𝛾

(1 − 𝜌2)

(1 − 𝜌2)

𝜎2
𝐷
𝑉 2
𝐷𝜎2
𝜎2
𝑅𝐷
𝜎2

(1 − 𝜌2),

(9)

𝑅𝐷

≡ 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑅𝐷) is the return variance of the dirty portfolio and
where 𝜎2
we have assumed that the variance of the market return and the return
of the dirty portfolio is approximately the same. Now, in a standard
CAPM equilibrium, 2𝑘𝜎2 equals the market risk premium (see (B.3) in
Appendix B), so if we assume that risk preferences have not changed
over  time  then  we  can  set 2𝑘𝜎2 equal  to  the  historical  market  risk
premium (MRP). Under this assumption, (9) becomes
( 𝛾

)

𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≈ MRP × 𝑉𝐷 ×

(1 − 𝜌2).

1 − 𝛾

(10)

In Appendix  C we  derive  the  exact  relation.  We  show  there  why
the above formula is an approximation of that relation and we will
presently demonstrate that the approximation is very accurate.

The above approximation is quite informative on how impact invest-
ing affects the cost of capital. For impact investing to materially affect
the cost of capital, three conditions need to be met. First, dirty stocks
cannot be easily substituted for clean stocks. In any risk-based model,
the degree of substitutability is measured by the correlation between
clean and dirty stocks, 𝜌, so the term 1 −𝜌2 measures the degree to which
clean and dirty stocks are not substitutable. Second, impact investors
must make up a significant fraction of investors, so the term 𝛾
, which
1−𝛾
is the ratio of the total wealth of investors with ESG preferences to other
investors, measures the influence of ESG investors. Finally, because the
non-ESG investors have limited wealth and must hold the dirty stocks
in equilibrium, the greater the fraction of the economy that dirty stocks
make up, the greater the price impact. This effect is measured by 𝑉𝐷,
the fraction of the economy that dirty stocks make up. The product
of these terms multiplied by a measure of investors’ risk appetite, as
implied by the historical market risk premium, gives the change in the
cost of capital brought about by the choice of ESG investors to divest
themselves of dirty stocks.

Because  the  quantities  in (10) are  observable,  we  can  use  this
approximation to infer to what extent divestiture has altered the cost
of capital in the United States. We use the Vanguard FTSE Social Index
Fund  (VFTSX)  which  replicates  the  FTSE  USA  4  Good  Select  Index,
to identify the clean portfolio. The Vanguard FTSE Social Index Fund

5 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Fig. 1. Combined total AUM invested in the three share classes of the Vanguard FTSE Social Index Fund in Millions of dollars.

invests exclusively in the United States, and with a 2021 AUM of $12
Billion, has the longest track record of any social index fund and is
the largest social index fund in the world.13 The FTSE USA 4 Good
Select Index consists of the subset of stocks in the FTSE USA Index
that pass an ESG screening procedure. The FTSE USA index is a market-
capitalization weighted index representing the performance of US large
and mid cap stocks. The evolution of the combined total AUM invested
in the three share classes of the Vanguard FTSE Social Index Fund is
plotted in Fig. 1.

Because this index contains clean stocks in their (normalized) mar-
ket weights, we assume that the dirty portfolio consists of only dirty
stocks in their (normalized) market weights. Under these assumptions
(further details are provided in Section 5.1), in the last 5 years of our
sample (December 2015-December 2020), the dirty portfolio comprised
a little more than a quarter of US market capitalization: 𝑉𝐷 =  27%.
We  assume  here  that  the  fraction  of  clean  and  dirty  stocks  is  the
same for the small and mid cap stocks that are not in the FTSE USA
Index.14 The  measured  correlation  between  the  clean  (FTSE  USA  4
Good Select) and the dirty (the other stocks in FTSE USA) portfolio
over this 5-year period is 𝜌 = 0.93. We use the historical market risk
premium of 6%. The only remaining quantity to identify is the fraction
of  wealth  controlled  by  ESG  investors.  The  fraction  of  mutual  fund
wealth  invested  in  ESG mutual  funds in  2021 is  less  than 1%.15 To
account for the possibility of Morningstar misclassification error, we
double this estimate to 2%, and assume this fraction is representative
of all capital investment in the economy. Using these parameters, the
effect on the cost of capital is
( 0.02
𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≈ 6% × 27%

(1 − 0.932) = 0.44 𝑏.𝑝.

)

1 − 0.02

A difference of half a basis point cannot meaningfully affect the capital
budgeting  decision  and  so  an  effect  of  this  size  cannot  affect  real
investment decision making.

The  FTSE  USA  4  Good  Select  Index  appears  to  be  specifically
designed by FTSE for Vanguard. It is related to (but less stringent than)
the FTSE USA 4 Good Index that is marketed to most investors. If we
instead use the FTSE USA 4 Good Index, over the same time period, the
dirty portfolio comprised a little under half of US market capitalization:

13 VFTSX has been in existence since 2000. In 2016, Blackrock launched a
competitor ETF, the iShares ESG Aware MSCI USA ETF which eclipsed the
Vanguard fund in AUM in 2022 for a brief period but has since lost almost
half of its AUM.
14 As the FTSE USA Index represents over 80% of the total U.S. stock market
capitalization, these stocks represent less than 20% of the US stock market.
15 We identified the universe of ESG mutual funds by using Morningstar clas-
sifications and the names of the funds. We then hand checked the prospectuses
of the top 20 ESG funds by AUM.

𝑉𝐷 = 48.5%. The measured correlation between the clean (FTSE USA 4
Good) and the dirty (the other stocks in FTSE USA) portfolio over the
same time period is 𝜌 = 0.97. Using these parameters provides
𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≈ 6% × 48.5%

(1 − 0.972) = 0.35 𝑏.𝑝.

( 0.02

)

1 − 0.02

Even though the FTSE USA 4 Good Index classifies more firms as dirty
which  increases  the  effect  on  the  cost  of  capital,  because  the  dirty
portfolio now comprises a greater fraction of the economy, it is more
correlated with the clean portfolio which more than offsets the effect
resulting in the same conclusion — the difference cannot meaningfully
impact the capital budgeting decision.

We have also explored the holdings of all socially conscious mutual
funds to gauge the fraction of dirty stocks in the economy. Such ESG
funds may choose not to hold certain stocks because they do not find
them to be attractive investment opportunities, regardless of the stocks’
ESG status. For this reason, the intersection of holdings across all ESG
funds will underestimate the fraction of clean stocks and overestimate
the fraction of dirty stocks. If we focus on the union of all stocks held
by ESG funds (which will include stocks that not all ESG investors will
agree on being clean), we estimate 𝑉𝐷 to be 18% and 𝜌 to be 0.8. These
two  changes  once  again  offset  each  other  resulting  in  an  estimated
change in the cost of capital of
𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≈ 6% × 18%

(1 − 0.82) = 0.79 𝑏.𝑝.

( 0.02

)

1 − 0.02

The  possibility  exists  that  the  mutual  fund  sector  might  not  be
representative of clean investing as a whole because clean investors
might be more concentrated in other sectors. We therefore looked for
other sources to calibrate the fraction of clean investors. One source is
an estimate reported in SIF (2020), a report published by The Forum
for Sustainable and Responsible Investment, an organization that rep-
resents sustainable investors. The report surveys investors asking them
whether they consider any ESG criteria in their investment decisions.
Based  on  this  survey,  the  report  estimates  the  total  wealth  of  U.S.-
domiciled  assets  using  sustainable  investing  strategies  to  be  $17.1
trillion, or about 33% of U.S. market wealth. This number is almost
certainly an overestimate. For example, the report concludes that of
these assets, $16.5 Trillion is controlled by money managers, which
would imply (based on the size of the money management industry)
that  over  90%  of  all  managed  money  uses  ESG  criteria.  It  appears
that in answering the survey, when a representative of an organization
states that it takes impact into account, the authors of the survey then
assume that all the capital that that organization manages is subject to
ESG criteria, regardless of whether a particular fund in the organization
actually uses ESG criteria to manage money. In addition, the survey also
includes strategies other than divestiture. Using this estimate (with the
other original parameter estimates) gives

6 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ = 6% × 27%

( 0.33

)

1 − 0.33

(1 − 0.932) = 10.6 𝑏.𝑝.

Using what is undoubtedly an overestimate of the fraction of wealth
managed under ESG criteria, the effect on the cost of capital is still
too small to meaningfully impact the firm’s real investment decision
making.

Some  readers  have  argued  that  instead  of  the  FTSE  indices,  we
should have focused our analysis on MSCI indices. The stated moti-
vation was that at the time of the writing of our paper, the iShares
ESG Aware MSCI USA ETF which replicates the MSCI ESG Aware Index
had shown large growth in AUM. Indeed the AUM of the iShares ESG
Aware MSCI USA fund eclipsed the AUM of the Vanguard FTSE Social
Index Fund for a brief period in 2022. Since that time, however, the
iShares ETF has lost a large amount of its AUM unlike the Vanguard
fund. Therefore, the Vanguard FTSE Social Index quickly regained its
position as the largest ESG index fund. Regardless, it is interesting to
explore what would have happened if we had used MSCI indices to
calibrate our model. As it turns out, the ESG Aware MSCI USA as well
as its parent index the MSCI USA indices are very similar to the two
corresponding FTSE index funds. The correlation between the iShares
ESG Aware Index and the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index is very high,
with a correlation of 0.997. Also the number of stocks in both indices
is  similar  with  an  implied 𝑉𝐷 close  to  50%.  Because  the  estimated
correlation between clean and dirty stocks as defined by MSCI is 0.99
our  calibration  exercise  yields,  once  again,  a  change  in  the  cost  of
capital of less than a basis point.

4.  What would it take?

√

In this section we consider the question of what it would take for
a divestment strategy to meaningfully impact real investment policy.
We begin by first considering how many ESG investors it would take to
impact the cost of capital by 1%. To answer this question we calibrate
the model as follows. We use the return volatility of the clean portfolio
=  15.8%, based on the monthly return volatility of the FTSE
of 𝜎𝑅𝐸
4  Good  Select  Index  over  the  past  5  years  multiplied  by
12.  We
identify the set of dirty stocks by taking the stocks missing in the FTSE
4 Good Select that are nevertheless in the FTSE USA stock index, and
then directly estimate the return volatility of this portfolio over the
same sample period providing 𝜎𝑅𝐷
= 15.2%. The correlation between
these two portfolios over the same 5-year period is 𝜌 = 0.93. We use
a risk free rate of 2%, MRP of 6% and 𝑉𝐷 = 27%, as before. We then
use these moments to infer the values of the exogenous parameters.
That is, we infer the cash flow standard deviations by multiplying the
return standard deviations by the value of the clean and dirty stocks
respectively. We then infer the expected liquidating dividends by using
the above values of MRP, 𝑉𝐷 and 𝑉𝐸 in the equilibrium in the economy
without ESG investors. Taking these exogenous parameters as given,
Fig. 2 plots the equilibrium 𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗, the effect on the cost of capital
of ESG investors, as a function of the fraction of wealth ESG investors
comprise.

The red curve in Fig. 2 plots the exact relation derived in Appendix C
of 𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ as a function of 𝛾, the fraction of wealth controlled by
clean investors, that is, (C.1). The dashed curve in Fig. 2 is (10), the
approximation  to (C.1).  Even  when  ESG  investors  make  up  50%  of
wealth, the impact on the cost of capital is less than 20 b.p. To impact
the cost of capital by at least 1% requires that at least 84% of investors
choose to hold only clean stocks.

We  can  also  infer  what  the  impact  would  be  if  a  large  investor
decided  to  divest  all  dirty  stocks.  For  example,  the  largest  investor
in the world, Blackrock, managed about $8 trillion at the end of our
sample period, which, if you assume is all invested in domestic stocks
(it is not currently, the portfolio contains a large bond allocation and
a large international allocation) is about 17% of the market. So if an
investor the size of Blackrock were to shift all their capital into clean
U.S. stocks (and none of Blackrock’s investors reacted by withdrawing

funds,  a  very  unlikely  scenario),  the  fraction  of  clean  shareholders
would rise from 2% to at most 19%. At 19%, the impact on the cost
of capital is just 4.6 b.p.

As the difference between the red and black dashed curves in Fig. 2
makes clear, the approximation is very accurate at current values of
the parameters, implying that the four variables in the approximation
– the fraction of ESG investors, the fraction of dirty stocks, the risk
premium demanded by investors and the correlation between clean and
dirty stocks – are the primary determinants of the impact of divestiture
on the cost of capital. This explains why, for a divestiture strategy to
work, ESG investors need to be such a large fraction of investors. To
first order, the last three variables are not under the control of ESG
investors.16 Using current estimates we have
6% × 27%(1 − 0.932) = 0.0021.

This calculation constrains the effectiveness of the divestiture strategy.
For (10) to reach 1%, we need 𝛾
> 4.6, implying that 𝛾 > 82%. There
1−𝛾
are two reasons for this. The correlation coefficient of 0.93 implies that
clean and dirty stocks are close substitutes. This and the fact that most
stocks are clean implies that to induce non-ESG investors to hold dirty
stocks does not require much price adjustment. The only way to get a
modest impact is to effectively induce non-ESG investors to hold only
dirty stocks, which is what happens when 𝛾 approaches one.

Another point where readers have criticized our model is that it
does not include investors who derive utility from not holding dirty
stocks, so called ‘‘warm glow preferences’’. Although we assume in the
model that all investors have mean–variance preferences, because ESG
investors restrict their investment universe to only clean stocks, one
can view these investors as having extreme warm glow preferences. In
a model in which they have a preference for holding clean stocks and
thus face a tradeoff between these preferences and economic returns,
the constraint that they cannot hold dirty stocks in any amount would
be relaxed, thereby reducing their impact on the cost of capital. So
one can view our results as an upper bound on the effectiveness of a
divestiture strategy when some investors have warm glow preferences.
Another source of criticism of our results is that we do not account
for the role of passive investing. In a recent paper (Cheng et al., 2023)
examine the role of ‘‘passive’’ investing and conclude that the effects
studied in our article are magnified as the fraction of passive investors
increases.  This  inference  is  critically  dependent  on  the  definition  of
passive. In our setting all investors are passive in the sense that they
hold the mean–variance efficient portfolio. To have the effect (Cheng
et al., 2023) identify, investors need to be passive in a much stronger
sense. Instead of choosing to follow a passive strategy (as our investors
do), they need to be constrained to follow a passive strategy. Because
these investors never trade, it is straightforward to compute how such
investors would affect the inferences from our model. One can simply
recompute the equilibrium inferences assuming these investors were
not part of the economy. So if constrained passive investors make up
𝜃 fraction of the economy, then the effective fraction of ESG investors,
𝛾 ′ is given by
𝛾 ′ ≡ 𝛾∕(1 − 𝜃).

In  their  calibration, Cheng  et  al. (2023)  assume  that  70%  of  in-
vestors are constrained passive, and that ESG investors make up 20% of
all investors. They conclude, under those assumptions, that the effect
on the cost of capital is 27 b.p. Although the model in Cheng et al.
(2023) is very different to the one in this article, the two models are
remarkably consistent. Using Fig. 2, to get a 27 b.p. effect on the cost
of capital would require 𝛾 ′ =  0.6, implying that with 𝜃 =  70%, ESG

16 Of course, as the fraction of ESG investors changes, in general equilibrium,
prices change which necessarily has a second order effect on these variables,
as is modeled in Fig. 2.

7 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Fig. 2.  Effect on the cost of capital of introducing ESG investors into the economy: The curves plot the change in the cost of capital, 𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗, as a function of the fraction
of wealth ESG investors comprise. The red curve is the exact effect on the cost of capital, that is, (C.1). The dashed black curve is the approximation, that is, (10).

investors  would  make  up 0.6 × 0.3  ≈  18% of  all  investors,  which  is
line with what Cheng et al. (2023) assumed. Although their effect is an
order of magnitude larger than what we find, the fact that it is still small
is an indication on how difficult it is for this strategy to have impact.
After  all,  assuming  that  70%  of  investors  are  constrained  passive  is
tantamount to assuming that all passive investors are constrained. That
is very unlikely to be true. Conversely, given current ESG participation
(𝛾 = 2%), one could also compute what fraction 𝜃 of investors would
have to be constrained passive to achieve a 1% change in the cost of
capital. Using Fig. 2, to have a 1% effect on the cost of capital, 𝛾 ′ = 82%,
implying  that 𝜃 =  1 − 0.02
=  97.6% of  investors  would  need  to  be
0.82
constrained to hold passive portfolios.

Finally, readers have rightly pointed out that we do not provide any
argument for what change in the cost of capital would be significant
enough to change real investment policy. Clearly, a change less than
10 b.p. is inconsequential given the uncertainty in the capital budgeting
process. We implicitly assumed that one would need at least a change
of 1%, but we fully acknowledge that that cut off is arbitrary. The cut
off also depends on the duration of the project. Small changes in the
cost of capital can have a large effect on NPV calculations for long
duration projects. Ultimately, this is an empirical question. However it
makes little sense investing time and effort in attempting to answer this
question without first demonstrating that the effect of the divestment
strategy on the cost of capital is more than just a few basis points.

The model we use in this article is the standard model in finance
and  has  been  used  in  the  theoretical  literature  studying  divestment
almost exclusively. Nevertheless, readers of this article have criticized
our conclusion by arguing that the model in this paper cannot explain
the index inclusion effect. Because of the close relation between that
effect and the divestment strategy we study, these readers question the
applicability of the model to answer the question at hand. However,
this argument is flawed. When properly calibrated, the model in this
paper is entirely consistent with the documented index inclusion effect.
Greenwood  and  Sammon (2022)  show  that,  in  the  most  recent
decade,  the  price  inclusion  effect  into  the  S&P500  index  is  0.3%.
Assuming an average duration of 40 years (based on a dividend yield of
2.5%), a price change of 30 b.p. implies a change in the expected return
of  0.75  b.p.  The  model-predicted  difference  in  the  expected  return
between S&P500 (Indexed) and non-S&P500 (Non-Indexed) stocks in
equilibria with and without index investors can be approximated by:
)

𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≈ MRP × 𝑉𝑁 𝐼 ×

(1 − 𝜌2)

.

(11)

( 𝛾

1 − 𝛾

𝜎2
𝑅𝑁 𝐼
𝜎2

As before, MRP is the market risk premium, 𝛾 is the fraction of investor
wealth in S&P 500 index funds (or potentially funds that closely track

8 

the S&P 500), 𝑉𝑁 𝐼 is the market capitalization of stocks not in the S&P
500 and 𝜌 is the correlation between S&P 500 stocks and non-S&P 500
stocks. The final term, the ratio of the return variance of stocks not in
the S&P 500 and the market variance, is required because, unlike in the
case of clean and dirty stocks, small and large stocks have substantially
different return variances.

To  calibrate  our  model  we  use  the  data  made  available  by  Ken
French  on  size  sorted  portfolios.  In  the  past  decade,  the  top  three
size  deciles  comprise  a  little  over  500  stocks  (521  on  average  with
a minimum of 505 and a maximum of 554). They therefore form a
very  close  approximation  of  the  S&P  500  Index.  Indeed,  the  return
correlation of these three top deciles with the S&P500 is 0.997 over
this sample period. The three top deciles represent an average of 86.6%
in market capitalization, implying 𝑉𝑁 𝐼 = 13.4%. Further, the standard
deviation of the stocks in the bottom seven deciles is 𝜎𝑅𝑁 𝐼
= 23.7%, the
market standard deviation is 𝜎 = 18.4% and the correlation between the
return of the top three deciles and the bottom seven deciles is 𝜌 = 0.89.
Fig.  3 plots  the  effect  of  the  cost  of  capital  as  a  function  of 𝛾 (the
fraction of investor wealth in the S&P500) at these calibrated numbers.
To get an effect on the expected return of 0.75 b.p. per annum the
model implies that 2.7% of investors restrict their investment universe
to only S&P500 stocks. Cutting the duration estimate in half to twenty
years, yields a change in the expected return of 1.5 b.p. which requires
just over 5% of investors to restrict their investment universe to only
S&P500 stocks. The implication that between 2% and 6% of investors
restrict their portfolios to S&P500 stocks is eminently plausible.

In  summary,  our  model’s  predictions  are  consistent  with  the  ob-
served S&P 500 inclusion effects. Historically the observed index inclu-
sion effects have been of larger magnitude. Greenwood and Sammon
(2022) attributed the decline in the inclusion effect to lower bid ask
spreads  and  increased  market  efficiency.  This  is  consistent  with  the
original finding in Harris and Gurel (1986) who document that nearly
all of the detected effect mean reverted in two weeks indicating that
a large part of the original effect can be attributed to liquidity effects
which are absent in our model. Given that the topic of our paper is
on how to best induce firms to change their real investment behavior,
short-term  price  pressure  effects  that  mean  revert  in  two  weeks  are
not our focus. That said, to generate the price effect of 3% that was
originally documented (implying a cost of capital effect of about 7 b.p.),
Fig. 3 shows that even in this case one would only need about 20% of
investors to restrict their investment universe to large stocks.

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Fig. 3.  S&P500 index inclusion effect: The curve plots the change in the expected return, 𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗, as a function of 𝛾 the fraction of wealth S&P 500 investors comprise, that
is, (11).

5.  Empirical evidence

5.1.  Data and descriptive statistics: FTSE indices

The theory we developed in the previous sections suggests that the
observed effect of ESG investors on the cost of capital should be small.
In this section we evaluate this prediction empirically. To assess the
effect of ESG investors on the cost of capital we focus on changes in ESG
classifications, that is, the effect on the cost of capital when a firm is
classified as clean or classified as dirty. According to our theory, when
ESG investors react to the change in status we should observe a change
in the cost of capital. Our objective in this section is to measure the
magnitude of this change.

One  immediate  concern  is  that  because  average  realized  returns
are a noisy measure of the expected return (cost of capital), observing
a  change  in  this  expectation  is  difficult.  Consequently  we  will  also
measure the concurrent change in the firm’s price. Because prices are
directly observable and, under the rational expectations assumption,
should reflect the capitalized value of the change in the cost of capital,
in principle the price change should be easier to detect. Note that if
the actions of investors actually do materially affect the cost of capital,
clean  (dirty)  firms  would  have  better  (worse)  growth  opportunities,
which would lead to an even larger price impact.

We use the same stock indices published by FTSE Russell to identify

changes in the status of companies. In the words of FTSE Russell:

‘‘The FTSE 4 Good indices are designed to measure the performance
of companies that have demonstrated strong Environmental, Social and
Governance  (ESG)  practices.  Transparent  management  and  clearly-
defined ESG criteria make FTSE 4 Good Indexes suitable tools to be
used by a wide variety of market participants when creating or assessing
sustainable investment products’’.
There are a number of reasons why we choose to focus on these
indices  to  identify  changes  in  the  ESG  status  of  stocks.  Because  the
Vanguard-FTSE Social Index fund chooses to replicate the FTSE USA 4
Good Select Index, when FTSE Russell changes the constituents of the
FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index, there is an immediate redeployment of
capital associated with the rebalancing activity of the largest index fund
in the space. But more importantly, Vanguard’s choice to replicate the
FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index is a business decision that presumably
reflects their belief that this index most effectively captures the space of
large clean US companies. Thus a change in the FTSE USA 4 Good Select
Index likely also reflects the investment decisions of other ESG investors
in the economy. Finally, the fact that the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index
is a subset of the FTSE USA Index implies that any stock not in the 4
Good Index must not have satisfied ESG criteria. If, instead, we used
the holdings of other impact funds, we could not differentiate between
stocks that are not included because they do not satisfy ESG criteria, or
because they do not represent good investment opportunities.

To assess the impact of ESG classification changes, we use both the
FTSE USA 4 Good Select and the FTSE USA 4 Good Index. Both indices
are subsets of the FTSE USA index. The FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index
has as its primary advantage the fact that the Vanguard index fund
tracks it, so we can be assured that a significant amount of capital does
react to an index change. However, FTSE Russell markets the FTSE USA
4 Good Index more intensively, so it is likely that there are investors
that react to changes in this index as well. We therefore report our
results for both indices.

We obtained data from FTSE on the constituents and their portfolio
weights for all three indices starting in the early 2000s until the end
of 2020.17 The number of constituents over this time sample for all
three indices is plotted in Fig. 4. For the FTSE USA Index the number
varies between 446 and 745. Both extremes occur early in the sample
after which the number of constituents stabilizes. The average over the
sample is 616. The number of constituents for the FTSE USA 4 Good
Index varies between 130 and 274 with an average of 189 and the
number of constituents for the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index varies
between 286 and 506 with an average of 403.

In Fig. 5 we plot the total market capitalization of all indices. The
total market capitalization of the FTSE USA Index at the end of our
sample (December 2020) is $33.1 Trillion representing 83% of the total
stock market capitalization of the United States ($40 Trillion). At that
time, the market capitalization of the FTSE USA 4 Good (Select) Index
was $18.3 Trillion ($28.2 Trillion) which equals 55% (85%) of the FTSE
USA stock market capitalization. This implies that the dirty stocks in
the FTSE USA Index make up 45% (15%) of the index at that point in
time.

Because we are interested in documenting the effects on prices and
returns  of  index  inclusions,  we  next  document  how  often  firms  are
added and excluded from each index. To facilitate this exercise, we
define dummy variables that capture inclusions and exclusions in each
index. First define the dummy that describes whether firm 𝑖 is in the
FTSE USA index at time 𝑡:

𝐼𝑖,𝑡 =

{1
0

if firm 𝑖 is in the FTSE USA Index at time t
otherwise.

(12)

17 We thank FTSE for generously sharing their data with us.

9 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Fig. 4.  FTSE index constituents: Number of constituents of the FTSE USA, the FTSE USA 4 Good and the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Indices.

Fig. 5.  FTSE index market capitalization: Total market capitalization of the FTSE USA, the FTSE USA 4 Good and the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Indices in $ Trillions.

Table 1
Inclusions and exclusions: Incidences of dummy variable realizations for the FTSE
USA Index, the FTSE USA 4 Good Index and the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Index.

𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 = 1
𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 = −1
𝑖𝑡 = 1
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖𝑡 = −1
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 = 1 & 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 = −1 & 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺

𝑖𝑡 = 1
𝑖𝑡 = −1

Number of events
4 Good (2001–2020)
872
795
411
385
54
200

4 Good Select (2005–2020)
508
653
812
824
118
386

The corresponding dummy variable for the FTSE USA 4 Good (Select)
index is defined as:

𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖,𝑡 =

1

0

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

if firm 𝑖 is in the FTSE USA 4 Good (Select) Index
at time t
otherwise.

The inclusion and exclusion events can then be described as:

𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖𝑡

≡ 𝐼𝑖,𝑡 − 𝐼𝑖,𝑡−1
𝑖,𝑡 − 𝐼 4𝐺
≡ 𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖,𝑡−1.

(13)

(14)

(15)

The latter two variables take the value 1 for an inclusion, −1 for an
exclusion, and 0 otherwise. In Table 1 we summarize the inclusion and
exclusion events in our sample for all three indices.

The table shows that there are many inclusion and exclusion events
for all three indices. The second column in the table compares inclusion
and exclusion events for the FTSE USA and the FTSE USA 4 Good Index
for the sample period that both indices are available: 2001–2020. The
total number of firms that have been in the FTSE USA and the FTSE
USA 4 Good Index at some point during this sample period equals 1474
and 589 respectively. Over this sample period, the FTSE USA had 872
inclusion events and 795 exclusion events, whereas the FTSE 4 Good
Index had 411 inclusion and 385 exclusion events. Only a small fraction
of  inclusion  events  coincide:  only  54  of  the  411  FTSE  USA  4  Good
inclusion events coincide with the companies’ inclusion in the FTSE
USA Index. This coinciding fraction is higher for index exclusion events,
200
= 52%. This is to be expected, as exclusion from the FTSE USA Index
385
implies exclusion from the FTSE USA 4 Good Index as membership of
the FTSE USA Index is a necessary condition for inclusion in the FTSE
USA 4 Good Index.

The  third  column  in  the  table  repeats  the  analysis  presented  in
the second column, but now comparing the FTSE US Index with the
FTSE  4  Good Select Index  over  the  sample  period  that  both  indices
are available: 2005–2020. Over this sample period, the FTSE USA had
508 inclusion events and 653 exclusion events, whereas the FTSE 4
Good Select Index had 812 inclusion and 824 exclusion events. The
number of inclusion events that coincided between the FTSE US and the
FTSE US 4 Good Select Index equals 118, and the number of coinciding
exclusion events equals 386. Note that the FTSE USA 4 Good Select had
substantially higher turnover than the FTSE USA 4 Good Index.

10 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Fig. 6.  Inclusion months: Number of total months included in the FTSE USA and the FTSE USA 4 Good Indices.

To further explore the relation between inclusion in the two indices,
we plot in Fig. 6 for all the stocks that were ever included in the FTSE
USA Index over the June 2001–December 2020 sample period, the total
number of inclusion months for the FTSE USA and the FTSE USA 4
Good  indices.  The  scatter  plot  exhibits  a  triangular  shape,  which  is
to be expected given that (as mentioned above), membership of the
FTSE USA Index is a necessary condition for inclusion in the FTSE USA
4 Good Index. Observations on the vertical line on the right side of
the graph represent companies that were included in the FTSE USA
Index for the full sample period. The horizontal line on the bottom
represents  companies  that  were  never  included  in  the  FTSE  4  Good
Index, and were thus deemed ‘‘dirty’’ firms for the whole sample period.
Companies on the diagonal represent firms that were included in both
indices for the same number of periods, presumably because they were
added and deleted at the same time. The graph shows that there are
many companies below the diagonal, indicating that for many firms
the inclusion and exclusion decision into the FTSE 4 Good Index show
no clear coincidence with the inclusion into the FTSE USA Index. They
therefore represent a change in status — an inclusion event in the FTSE
4 Good Index indicates a firm transitioning from dirty to clean and an
exclusion event indicates a firm transitioning from clean to dirty.

When we repeat the analysis for the FTSE 4 Good Select Index (over
the available data sample period of November 2005 through December
2020), a similar pattern emerges, though there are a small number of
deviations in the scatter plot above the 45-degree line, resulting from
the fact that in rare cases firms stay a few months longer in the FTSE
4 Good Select Index than in the FTSE US Index (see Fig. 7).18

To  gauge  the  effect  of  inclusion  and  exclusion  events  on  prices
and returns, we need to construct a merged data set of FTSE index
data with return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP). While such a merge appears straightforward, it turns out to
be quite involved. The reason is that different security identifiers are
used  in  different  contexts.  The  main  security  level  identifiers  used
by  FTSE  Russell  are  the  ISIN  and  the  SEDOL  numbers,  whereas  the
CRSP  database  provides  CUSIPs  and  (firm-level)  PERMCO  numbers.
To accomplish the merge, we use the S&P Global Market Intelligence
database provided on WRDS which has an identifiers database linking
company  ISINs  and  CUSIPs.  Because  CUSIPs  change  over  time  and
companies can issue multiple securities, we use PERMCO to identify
the single security associated with each holding.

5.2.  Results gauging price and return effects

Our theory predicts that when a stock experiences either an inclu-
sion or an exclusion event the effect on the cost of capital will be small.
In this subsection we test this implication of the theory.

Our main regression specification is the following:

(16)

𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿4𝐺𝛥𝐼 4𝐺

𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝑐 + 𝛾 𝐼𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿 𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾4𝐺𝐼 4𝐺
where 𝑅𝑖𝑡 is the monthly stock return including dividends on all stocks
in  the  CRSP  database.  The  coefficient, 𝛾4𝐺,  on  the  dummy  variable
𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖𝑡 measures the average return difference between clean and dirty
FTSE  USA  stocks  and  is  therefore  an  estimate  of  the  effect  of  ESG
investors on the cost of capital of the average stock in the FTSE USA
Index.  The  coefficient, 𝛿4𝐺,  on  the  dummy  variable 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖𝑡 measures
the  instantaneous  price  reaction  of  an  inclusion  or  exclusion  event
(recall that this dummy is 1 in the month of inclusion and −1 in the
month  of  exclusion)  and  thus  measures  the  capitalized  value  of  the
implied change in the cost of capital (the associated percentage price
change).  Notice  that  although  the  dummy  variables 𝐼𝑖𝑡 and 𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 are
primarily included to control for inclusion in the FTSE USA Index, they
also measure the effect of other inclusion effects unrelated to social
investing such as liquidity.

If inclusion in the 4 Good (Select) Index has a measurable effect
on the cost of capital, we would expect to find a positive coefficient
on 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
suggesting an instantaneous price appreciation (depreciation)
𝑖𝑡
upon  inclusion  (exclusion).  Similarly,  we  would  expect  a  negative
coefficient on 𝐼 4𝐺
implying lower (higher) average returns following
𝑖𝑡
the instantaneous price appreciation (depreciation).

Table 2 reports the results of the test of (16). In line with our theory,
we find small estimates of 𝛿4𝐺. The point estimate of the instantaneous
price  change  of  the  4  Good  Index  is  0.22%  (first  data  column  in
Table 2). Assuming an average stock duration of 40 years, the implied
change in the cost of capital is 0.55 b.p.19 This duration estimate is
based on aggregate stock market data. Of course, there is large cross
sectional variation in stock specific duration estimates, but it would
be hard to argue for a stock duration less than 10 years, implying an
upper bound on the implied change in the cost of capital of 2.2 b.p. The
estimated instantaneous price change using the 4 Good Select Index
is 0.48% (second data column in Table 2), implying a cost of capital
impact for the average firm of 1.2 b.p., with an upper bound of 6 b.p.
Although the point estimates are not statistically different from zero,
they are in line with the order of magnitude predicted by the theory.
Given the extremely small estimated effect on the cost of capital,
measuring the change directly using average realized returns is more
challenging. In line with this, the estimate of 𝛾4𝐺 in both specifications
in Table 2 is not significantly different from zero and has a sign that is
both inconsistent with the theory and the prior estimate using the price
change. Given the uncertainty in estimating the effect and the closeness
of the coefficients to zero, there is essentially a near 50% probability
of estimating the wrong sign.

18 It is unclear why FTSE Russell departed from their policies in these rare
cases,  but  we  conjecture  that  it  is  related  to  Vanguard’s  optimal  tracking
strategies.

19 van  Binsbergen (2024)  estimates  stock  durations  implied  by  dividend
yields.

11 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Fig. 7.  Inclusion months: Number of total months included in the FTSE USA and the FTSE USA 4 Good Select Indices.

Table 2
Return and price effects of index inclusions: FTSE USA vs. FTSE USA 4 Good
(Select). The table reports estimation results of the regression specified in (16). The
equal 1 for all months that a stock is in the index. The variables
dummies 𝐼𝑖𝑡 and 𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖𝑡
equal 1 in the month of inclusion, −1 in the month of exclusion, and 0
𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 and 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖𝑡
otherwise. Standard errors are double clustered by firm and yearmonth.

(1)
4Good

−0.0010
(−0.65)
0.0004
(0.28)
0.0131
(1.56)
0.0022
(0.39)
0.0098∗∗∗
(2.60)

1 376 791
0.00

𝐼𝑖𝑡
𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)

𝑖𝑡

𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)

𝑖𝑡

Constant

Observations
𝑅2
𝑡-statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

(2)
4Good Select
−0.0009
(−0.50)
0.0001
(0.02)
0.0117
(1.34)
0.0048
(0.43)
0.0101∗∗∗
(2.65)

1 365 665
0.00

One  concern  is  that  because  investors  might  be  slow  to  update
their portfolios in response to changes in ESG classifications, the above
estimates will underestimate the magnitude of the effects. To address
this concern we explore, in Table 3, the effect of including additional
lags of 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
. The main insight remains the same: there seems little to no
𝑖𝑡
evidence that inclusion in the FTSE USA 4 Good (Select) Index has any
meaningful price or return effects. The cumulative effect of all the lags
of 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺
, that is, the cumulative price appreciation within 4 months after
𝑖𝑡
inclusion into the FTSE US 4 Good (Select) Index is smaller than the
original estimate, suggesting that the magnitude of the measured price
effect of inclusion and exclusion events is not dampened by investor
sluggishness. The overall conclusion is that the effect on the cost of
capital of a change in ESG status of a firm is so small that it cannot
meaningfully influence the firm’s investment decisions.

In line with prior work on the effect of index inclusions in general,
we  do  find  modest  effects  associated  with  inclusions  and  exclusions
from  the  FTSE  USA  Index  itself  (third  row  in Table  2).  The  events
are associated with an instantaneous price change of 1.31% (4Good
specification)  and  1.17%  (4Good  Select  specification)  and  a  lower
average return of 10 b.p. (4Good specification) and 9 b.p. (4Good Select
specification)  consistent  with  what Greenwood  and  Sammon (2022)

find  for  the  S&P  500  Index.  Although  the  signs  are  all  consistent,
none  of  these  estimates  are  statistically  significantly  different  from
zero.  Specification  (2)  and  (5)  in Table  3 measure  the  price  effects
in  the  months  following  the  events.  Although  the  estimates  are  not
statistically significantly different from zero, what appears to be evident
is  that  the  price  effect  reverses  in  the  months  following  the  inclu-
sion/exclusion event which is consistent with the original evidence on
the S&P 500 inclusion effect documented in Harris and Gurel (1986).
The subsequent reversal suggests that the price change is associated
with the short-term price pressure from participants seeking to match
the index, rather than a permanent change in the cost of capital.

5.3.  Changes in risk

One advantage of our empirical approach is that we do not need to
take a stand on the underlying risk model in the economy. Instead we
make the much weaker assumption that there is no correlation between
the inclusion event and changes to the riskiness of the firm. In this
section we test this assumption by exploring whether inclusion in the
4Good (or the 4Good Select) Index leads to changes in firm risk as
measured  by  the  CAPM.  To  evaluate  whether  being  included  in  the
index has an effect on the systematic risk of the firm we use daily stock
return data to compute for each stock and each month the realized
(Scholes–Williams) beta in that month. That is, we regress daily stock
returns in excess of the risk free rate on daily market returns and lagged
market returns in excess of the risk free rate (mktrf) for each month,
sum the coefficients and use these estimated betas, denoted by ̂𝛽𝑖𝑡 as
left-hand-side variables in our regression framework:
̂𝛽𝑖𝑡 = 𝑐 + 𝛾 𝐼𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾4𝐺𝐼 4𝐺

𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡.

(17)

To  better  evaluate  whether  the  inclusion  event  itself  causes  the
riskiness of the firm to change rather than high or low beta firms having
a higher or lower probability of being selected for one of the indices,
we also include a set of stock fixed effects. The results are summarized
in Table 4.

The table shows that being included in the FTSE4 Good US Select
Index  has  no  detectable  influence  on  the  CAPM  beta  of  firms.  The
coefficient is −0.0169 with a t-stat of −0.96. For the FTSE 4 Good index
we find a small, though statistically significant, effect: the coefficient
is −0.06 with a t-statistic of −2.85, which for an equity risk premium
of 6% corresponds to a change in the annual cost of capital of roughly

12 

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Table 3
Return and price effects of index inclusions: FTSE USA vs. FTSE USA 4Good (Select). The table reports estimation results of the regression specified in (16). The dummies
equal 1 in the month of inclusion, −1 in the month of exclusion, and 0 otherwise.
𝐼𝑖𝑡 and 𝐼 4𝐺
𝑖𝑡
Standard errors are double clustered by firm and yearmonth.
(1)
4Good

equal 1 for all months that a stock is in the index. The variables 𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡 and 𝛥𝐼 4𝐺

(3)
4Good

(2)
4Good

𝑖𝑡

−0.0010
(−0.65)
0.0003
(0.21)

0.0012
(0.10)

0.0058
(0.89)

𝐼𝑖𝑡
𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)

𝑖𝑡

𝛥𝐼𝑖𝑡

𝛥𝐼𝑖,𝑡−1

𝛥𝐼𝑖,𝑡−2

𝛥𝐼𝑖,𝑡−3

𝑖𝑡

𝑖,𝑡−1

𝛥𝐼𝑖,𝑡−4
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)
𝛥𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)

𝑖,𝑡−3

𝑖,𝑡−2

𝑖,𝑡−4

Constant

0.0101∗∗∗
(2.64)

Observations
𝑅2
𝑡-statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

1 368 499
0.00

−0.0013
(−0.89)
0.0011
(0.68)
0.0119
(1.41)
0.0007
(0.05)
0.0106
(0.82)
−0.0056
(−0.68)
−0.0097
(−0.66)
0.0027
(0.47)
0.0035
(0.52)
−0.0124
(−1.11)
0.0016
(0.23)
−0.0130∗
(−1.91)
0.0107∗∗∗
(2.85)

1 327 152
0.00

−0.0013
(−0.84)
0.0010
(0.64)

0.0006
(0.05)
0.0105
(0.82)
−0.0057
(−0.69)
−0.0099
(−0.67)

0.0035
(0.52)
−0.0124
(−1.11)
0.0014
(0.21)
−0.0130∗
(−1.91)
0.0107∗∗∗
(2.85)

1 327 152
0.00

Table 4
CAPM Betas for included and excluded firms. The table reports regression results
of firm-level estimated CAPM betas (left hand side) on the inclusion dummies. Stock
fixed effects are included. Standard errors are double clustered by yearmonth and firm.
(1)
4Good

𝐼𝑖𝑡
𝐼 4𝐺(𝑆 𝑒𝑙 𝑒𝑐 𝑡)

𝑖𝑡

Constant

Observations
Stock Fixed Effects
𝑅2
𝑡-statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

−0.0501∗
(−1.86)
−0.0603∗∗∗
(−2.85)
0.9484∗∗∗
(58.05)

1 386 980
Y
0.08

36bps. The sign of the coefficient further strengthens the arguments
presented in this paper. If inclusion in the 4Good Index slightly lowers
systematic firm risk, this should lead to an instantaneous risk-based
increase in the price upon inclusion. The measured instantaneous price
inclusion effect in the previous sections was already very small, and
thus becomes even smaller after adjusting for this effect of risk.

6.  Conclusion

In this paper we have evaluated, both theoretically and empirically,
the quantitative impact of socially conscious investing in the secondary
market. We conclude that at current participation levels the divestiture
strategy is unlikely to have a large impact on the long-term cost of
capital of targeted firms. An unrealistically large increase in the level

13 

(4)
4Good Select
−0.0009
(−0.50)
−0.0000
(−0.01)

0.0053
(0.46)

−0.0069
(−0.56)

0.0104∗∗∗
(2.73)

1 346 087
0.00

(5)
4Good Select
−0.0007
(−0.34)
−0.0013
(−0.36)
0.0092
(1.03)
0.0025
(0.18)
0.0057
(0.41)
−0.0065
(−0.79)
−0.0118
(−0.87)
0.0063
(0.56)
−0.0056
(−0.44)
0.0103
(1.34)
−0.0030
(−0.48)
−0.0028
(−0.22)
0.0107∗∗∗
(2.78)

1 271 890
0.00

(6)
4Good Select
−0.0006
(−0.31)
−0.0012
(−0.36)

0.0024
(0.18)
0.0056
(0.40)
−0.0062
(−0.76)
−0.0119
(−0.87)

−0.0057
(−0.44)
0.0102
(1.33)
−0.0032
(−0.51)
−0.0029
(−0.22)
0.0107∗∗∗
(2.78)

1 271 891
0.00

of participation would be required for the strategy to affect corporate
policy.

Given the current levels of socially conscious capital, our conclusion
is that using primary markets would be a more effective strategy to
effect social change. Investors should either directly invest in firms by
funding negative NPV projects (that achieve social good) or follow a
policy of engagement. By purchasing the stock in targeted companies
rather than selling the stock, socially conscious investors could poten-
tially have greater impact by exercising their rights of control through
the proxy process or by gaining a majority stake and replacing upper
management.

(2)
4Good Select
−0.0459
(−1.64)
−0.0169
(−0.96)
0.9468∗∗∗
(57.83)

1 375 132
Y
0.08

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jonathan  B.  Berk: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  origi-
nal draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources,
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisi-
tion, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jules H. van
Binsbergen: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have nothing to disclose.

Appendix A.  Derivation of the equilibrium with ESG investors

The beta (with respect to the mean–variance efficient portfolio), 𝛽𝐸 ,

of the clean portfolio is
𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅𝐸 , 𝑅𝑚𝑣)
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑅𝑚𝑣)

𝛽𝐸

=

≡

1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏
𝑉𝐸

(

𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜎2
𝐸
𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸

)

,

(A.1)

𝐷𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒)𝐷𝐸
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

)

=

(1 − 𝑒)𝜎2

𝐸 + 𝜌𝜎𝐷𝜎𝐸

𝑉𝐸 (1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)

𝑒 = 𝛾

)

(

1 +

𝜌𝜎𝐷
𝜎𝐸

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

where we have used

𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅𝐸 , 𝑅𝑚𝑣) = 𝑐 𝑜𝑣

,

( 𝐷𝐸
𝑉𝐸
𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜎2
𝐸
𝑉𝐸 (1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)

=

and

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑅𝑚𝑣) =

𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒)2𝜎2
𝜎2

𝐸 + 2(1 − 𝑒)𝜌𝜎𝐸 𝜎𝐷

(1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)2

=

𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸
(1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)2
Similarly, the beta of the dirty portfolio, 𝛽𝐷 is

.

𝛽𝐷

≡ 1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏
𝑉𝐷

where

𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅𝐷, 𝑅𝑚𝑣) =

(

𝛴𝐷𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜌𝜎𝐷𝜎𝐸
𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸

)

𝛴𝐷𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜌𝜎𝐷𝜎𝐸
𝑉𝐷(1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)

.

Substituting this expression into (1) gives 𝑒 in terms of primitives:

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Substituting (A.7) into (A.3) gives 𝑟 in terms of primitives:
) 𝜎2
𝐸
𝑉𝐸

𝜌𝜎𝐷
𝜎𝐸

̄𝐷𝐸
𝑉𝐸

1 + 𝑟 =

− 2𝑘

1 +

(

.

Finally, substituting (A.8) into (A.4) provides 𝑏 in terms of primitives:

𝛾 − 𝑏 = 1 −

̄𝐷𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒) ̄𝐷𝐸
1 + 𝑟

+ 2𝑘

𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸
(1 − 𝛾)(1 + 𝑟)

.

(A.10)

Using the expressions for the risk free rate and equilibrium holdings,
(A.8), (A.9) and (A.10), we can solve (A.4) for 𝑉𝐸 :
̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐸 𝜎2
( 𝛾
1−𝛾

̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2

(1 − 𝜌2)

𝑉𝐸 =

𝜎2
𝐷
𝜎2

1 +

(

)

)

(A.2)

=

̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐸 𝜎2
̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (1 + 𝛤 )

,

(A.8)

(A.9)

(A.11)

(A.12)

To solve for 𝑟 and 𝑏 we need to solve each group’s maximization

problem. ESG investors pick 𝑏 to maximize

𝑏
𝛾

𝑟 +

(

1 −

)

𝑏
𝛾

𝐸[𝑅𝐸 ] − 𝑘

)2

(

1 −

𝑏
𝛾

𝑣𝑎𝑟[𝑅𝐸 ],

Taking the derivative and setting it equal to zero gives

𝑟 − 𝐸[𝑅𝐸 ] + 2𝑘

1 −

𝑣𝑎𝑟[𝑅𝐸 ] = 0

(

)

𝑏
𝛾

1 + 𝑟 =

(

1 −

− 2𝑘

̄𝐷𝐸
𝑉𝐸

𝑏
𝛾

) 𝜎2
𝐸
𝑉 2
𝐸

.

Other investors pick 𝑏 to maximize
(

(

)

−

𝑏
1 − 𝛾

𝑟 +

1 +

𝑏
1 − 𝛾

𝐸[𝑅𝑚𝑣] − 𝑘

1 +

)2

𝑏
1 − 𝛾

𝑣𝑎𝑟[𝑅𝑚𝑣].

Taking the derivative and setting it equal to zero gives
(

)

𝑟 − 𝐸[𝜔𝐷𝑅𝐷 + 𝜔𝐸 𝑅𝐸 ] + 2𝑘

1 +

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝜔𝐷𝑅𝐷 + 𝜔𝐸 𝑅𝐸 ) = 0

𝑏
1 − 𝛾

1 + 𝑟 =

̄𝐷𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒) ̄𝐷𝐸
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)
Eqs. (A.3) and (A.4) jointly determine 𝑟 and 𝑏.

− 2𝑘

.

(A.4)

̄1 + ̄𝑅𝐸 =

where 𝛤 is defined by (6). Rearranging terms in (A.11) gives
= ̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (1 + 𝛤 ) + 2𝑘𝜎2 𝛴𝐸
𝑉𝐸
)
𝐸 − (1 + 𝛤 )

̄𝐷𝐸
𝑉𝐸
̄𝑅𝐸 = ̄𝑅 + 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛽𝑚
≡ 𝛴𝐸
where 𝛽𝑚
𝐸
𝑉𝐸
normalization

is the market beta of the clean portfolio. Using the price

𝑉𝐷 = 1 − 𝑉𝐸

=

so

̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤 )
̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (1 + 𝛤 )

(A.3)

̄𝑅𝐷 = ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2

(

1 + 𝛤 −

= ̄𝑅 + 2𝑘𝜎2

(

(

𝛽𝑚
𝐷 −

𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤
𝑉𝐷

1 − 𝛤

𝑉𝐸
𝑉𝐷

)

))

(A.13)

(A.14)

≡ 𝛴𝐷
𝑉𝑑

where 𝛽𝑚
is the market beta of the dirty portfolio. Using (A.12)
𝐷
and (A.14), the difference in the expected return of dirty and clean
stocks, 𝛥 ̄𝑅, is

(

)

𝛥 ̄𝑅 ≡ 𝑅𝐷 − 𝑅𝐸 = 2𝑘𝜎2

𝛤
𝐸 +
𝑉𝐷
)
= 2𝑘𝜎2 ( ̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2(1 + 𝛤 )

𝛽𝑚
𝐷 − 𝛽𝑚

(

×

𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤
̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤 ) −

𝛴𝐸
̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛴𝐸

)

(A.15)

The return of the clean portfolio is given by the pricing equation

𝐸[𝑅𝐸 ] − 𝑟 = 𝛽𝐸 (𝐸[𝜔𝐷𝑅𝐷 + 𝜔𝐸 𝑅𝐸 ] − 𝑟).

(A.5)

Appendix B.  Derivation of the equilibrium without ESG investors

Substituting (A.1) and (3) into this expression gives:
(
̄𝐷𝐸
𝑉𝐸

𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜎2
𝐸
𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸

− (1 + 𝑟) =

)

1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏
𝑉𝐸
( ̄𝐷𝐷 + (1 − 𝑒) ̄𝐷𝐸
1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏

×

)

− (1 + 𝑟)

.

(A.6)

Substituting (A.4) into the right side of (A.6) and rearranging terms
gives,

̄𝐷𝐸 − (1 + 𝑟)𝑉𝐸 = 2𝑘(1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)

(

×

𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝛾 + 𝑏)

)

.

(

𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 − 𝑒𝜎2
𝐸
𝜎2 − 2𝑒𝛴𝐸 𝜎2 + 𝑒2𝜎2
𝐸

)

Substituting (A.3) into the left hand side of this expression and simpli-
fying provides,

𝛾 − 𝑏 = 𝑉𝐸 𝛾

)

(

1 +

𝜌𝜎𝐷
𝜎𝐸

.

(A.7)

14 

To assess the effect of ESG investors, we now derive the equilibrium
when all investors are identical. In this standard CAPM equilibrium, all
investors choose to hold the market portfolio, which is mean–variance
efficient. This implies that the expected return of the dirty portfolio is
given by the CAPM pricing relation
𝐸[𝑅∗

𝐷] − 𝑟∗ = 𝛽𝐷(𝐸[𝑅] − 𝑟∗),

(B.1)

where

𝛽∗
𝐷 =

𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅∗

𝐷, 𝑅)

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑅)

=

𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅∗
𝐷, 𝑅)
𝜎2

,

and asterisks denote equilibrium variables in the economy with identi-
cal investors.20 Now

20 Because of the price normalization, the return of the market portfolio does
not depend on the preferences of investors implying that market variables do
not require asterisks.

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅∗

𝐷, 𝑅) = 𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝑅∗

𝐸 𝑅∗
𝐸 )

𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ = 2𝑘𝜎2 ( ̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2)

𝐷𝑅∗

𝐷 + 𝑉 ∗
𝐷, 𝑉 ∗
𝑐 𝑜𝑣(𝐷𝐷, 𝐷𝐷 + 𝐷𝐸 )
𝑉 ∗
𝐷
𝜎2
𝐷 + 𝜎𝐷 𝐸
𝑉 ∗
𝐷

,

=

=

so

𝛽∗
𝐷 =

𝛴𝐷𝜎2
𝑉 ∗
𝐷

.

To solve for 𝑟∗ investors maximize

𝛼∗𝑟∗ + (1 − 𝛼∗)𝐸[𝑅] − 𝑘(1 − 𝛼∗)2𝜎2.

Taking the derivative, setting it equal to zero and then setting 𝛼∗ = 0
gives

𝑟∗ − 𝐸[𝑅] + 2𝑘𝜎2 = 0,

implying

𝑟∗ = ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2,

(B.3)

where ̄𝑅 ≡ 𝐸[𝑅]. Substituting these expressions and 𝛽∗
Eq. (B.1) gives the cost of capital,
𝐷 = ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2 + 2𝑘𝜎2𝛽𝐷
̄𝑅∗
)
𝛴𝐷
𝑉 ∗
𝐷

= ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2

≡ 𝐸[𝑅∗

̄𝑅∗
𝐷

1 −

𝐷],

(

.

𝐷 into the pricing

Following similar logic gives
𝐸 = ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2
̄𝑅∗

1 −

(

)

.

𝛴𝐸
𝑉 ∗
𝐸

(B.2)

(B.4)

(B.5)

(B.6)

To get expressions for 𝑉 ∗

𝐷 and 𝑉 ∗

𝐸 in terms of primitives, substitute

− 1 into the pricing relation (B.1),

̄𝐷𝐷
𝑉 ∗
𝐷

̄𝑅∗
𝐷 =
̄𝐷𝐷
𝑉 ∗
𝐷

− (1 + 𝑟∗) = 𝛽𝐷

( ̄𝑅 − 𝑟∗) .

Using (B.3) and (B.2) gives
̄𝐷𝐷
𝛴𝐷
𝑉 ∗
𝑉 ∗
𝐷
𝐷

− (1 + ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2) =

2𝑘𝜎2)
(

𝑉 ∗
𝐷 =

̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐷𝜎2
1 + ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2

=

̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐷𝜎2
̄𝐷𝐷 + ̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2

.

Because 𝑉 ∗

𝐸 = 1 − 𝑉 ∗
̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐸 𝜎2
1 + ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2

=

𝑉 ∗
𝐸 =

𝐷, we have

̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐸 𝜎2
̄𝐷𝐷 + ̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2

.

(B.7)

(B.8)

Finally, the difference in the cost of capital between clean and dirty
stocks is

𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≡ ̄𝑅∗

𝐷 − ̄𝑅∗

𝐸 = 2𝑘𝜎2

( 𝛴𝐷
𝑉 ∗
𝐷
= 2𝑘𝜎2 ( ̄𝐷𝐷 + ̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2)

−

(

𝛴𝐸
𝑉 ∗
𝐸

)

𝛴𝐷
̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐷𝜎2

= 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛽∗

𝐷 − 𝛽∗
𝐸

)

−

𝛴𝐸
̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝛴𝐸 𝜎2

)

.

(

×

𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤
̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤 ) −
𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤
̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤 ) −

(

𝛴𝐷
̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛴𝐷

−(2𝑘𝜎2)2𝛤

)

)

𝛴𝐸
̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛴𝐸

)

(

= 2𝑘𝜎2𝛤 ( ̄𝐷𝐸 + ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2)
𝛴𝐷
( ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤 )

×

)( ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛴𝐷)
̄𝐷𝐷 + 𝛴𝐸 𝛤

̄𝐷𝐸 − 𝛴𝐸

𝛴𝐷

( ̄𝐷𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛴𝐷 + 𝛤 )

)( ̄𝐷𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛴𝐸 )

1 + ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2)
(

(
1 + ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2(1 + 𝛤 )

) 𝑉𝐷(1 + ̄𝑅𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛽𝑚
𝐷)

)

)

(

−(2𝑘𝜎2)2𝛤

(

= 2𝑘𝜎2𝛤 𝛽𝑚
𝐷

−(2𝑘𝜎2)2𝛤

×

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

(

𝐷(1 + ̄𝑅𝐸 ) − 𝛽𝑚
𝛽𝑚
(
𝐷 + 𝛤
𝛽𝑚
𝑉𝐷

𝐸 (1 + ̄𝑅𝐷) + 𝛽𝑚

𝐸

𝛤
𝑉𝐷
(1 + ̄𝑅𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛽𝑚
𝐸 )

))

1 + ̄𝑅𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

= 2𝑘𝜎2𝑉𝐷𝛤𝑅𝛽𝑚
𝐷

(

×

1 + ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2)
(
)
(
1 + ̄𝑅 − 2𝑘𝜎2(1 + 𝛤𝑅𝑉 2
𝐷)

(1 + ̄𝑅𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛽𝑚
𝐷)

)

×

)

( 𝜎2
𝑅𝐷
𝜎2
−(2𝑘𝜎2𝑉𝐷)2𝛤𝑅
𝐷(1 + ̄𝑅𝐸 ) − 𝛽𝑚
𝛽𝑚

(

1 + ̄𝑅𝐷 − 2𝑘𝜎2 (𝛽𝑚
(

×

𝐸 (1 + ̄𝑅𝐷) + 𝛽𝑚
))

𝐸 𝛤𝑅𝑉𝐷
(1 + ̄𝑅𝐸 − 2𝑘𝜎2𝛽𝑚
𝐸 )

𝐷 + 𝛤𝑅𝑉𝐷

(C.1)

)

)

( 𝜎2
𝑅𝐷
𝜎2

×

where 𝛤𝑅

≡ 𝛤
𝑉 2
𝐷

)

(

𝜎2
𝜎2
𝑅𝐷

)

( 𝛾
1−𝛾

=

(1 −𝜌2) and 𝜎2
𝑅𝐷

= 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑅𝐷). Notice that

all the terms in the large parentheses in (C.1) are approximately equal
to 1. Then note from (B.3), that prior to the advent of impact investing,

2𝑘 =

𝑅 − 𝑟∗
𝜎2

=

MRP
𝜎2

,

where MRP is the market risk premium. If we assume that risk pref-
erences have not changed over time then 2𝑘𝜎2 equals the historical
market risk premium implying that 2𝑘𝜎2𝑉𝐷 is on the order of about 1%.
That implies that the second term in (C.1) is so small we can ignore it.
Hence, we can approximate (C.1) with

( 𝛾

)

1 − 𝛾

(1 − 𝜌2).

(C.2)

𝛥 ̄𝑅 − 𝛥 ̄𝑅∗ ≈ 2𝑘𝜎2𝑉𝐷𝛤𝑅 = MRP × 𝑉𝐷 ×

Data availability

(B.9)

Berk, Jonathan; van Binsbergen, Jules (2024), ‘‘Impact of Impact Inv
esting’’, Mendeley Data, V1, doi: 10.17632/gzp97wdddc.1 (Mendeley
Data)

Appendix C.  Difference in the cost of capital with and without ESG
investors

References

Eq. (A.15) is the difference in the cost of capital between clean and
dirty stocks after a portion of investors acquire ESG preferences and
trade to a new equilibrium. Eq. (B.9) is the difference in the cost of
capital before the existence of ESG investors. The difference between
the two is therefore the effect of ESG investors on the cost of capital:

15 

Avramov,  Doron,  Cheng,  Si,  Lioui,  Abraham,  Tarelli,  Andrea,  2021.  Sustainable

investing with ESG rating uncertainty. Available at SSRN, 3711218.

Barber, Brad M., Morse, Adair, Yasuda, Ayako, 2021. Impact investing. J. Financ. Econ.

139 (1), 162–185.

Barnea,  Amir,  Heinkel,  Robert,  Kraus,  Alan,  2005.  Green  investors  and  corporate

investment. Struct. Change Econ. Dyn. 16 (3), 332–346.

J.B. Berk and J.H. van Binsbergen

Journal of Financial Economics 164 (2025) 103972 

Bennett, Benjamin, Stulz, René M., Wang, Zexi, 2020. Does Joining the S & P 500
Index Hurt Firms? Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Berk, Jonathan B., 1997. Necessary conditions for the CAPM. J. Econom. Theory 73

(1), 245–257.

Blitz,  David,  Fabozzi,  Frank  J.,  2017.  Sin  stocks  revisited:  Resolving  the  sin  stock

anomaly. J. Portf. Manag. 44 (1), 105–111.

Brest, Paul Andrew, Gilson, Ronald J., Wolfson, Mark A., 2018. How investors can (and

can’t) create social value.

Broccardo, Eleonora, Hart, Oliver D., Zingales, Luigi, 2020. Exit vs. Voice. Working

Paper 27710, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chava, Sudheer, 2014. Environmental externalities and cost of capital. Manage. Sci. 60

(9), 2223–2247.

Cheng,  Gong,  Jondeau,  Eric,  Mojon,  Benoit,  Vayanos,  Dimitri,  2023.  The  Impact
of  Green  Investors  on  Stock  Prices.  Technical  Report,  Bank  for  International
Settlements.

Cornell, Bradford, 2020. ESG investing: Conceptual issues. J. Wealth Manag. 23 (3),

61–69.

Dam, Lammertjan, Scholtens, Bert, 2015. Toward a theory of responsible investing: On
the economic foundations of corporate social responsibility. Resour. Energy Econ.
41, 103–121.

Dangl, Thomas, Halling, Michael, Yu, Jin, Zechner, Josef, 2023. Social preferences and

corporate investment. Available at SSRN 4470567.

Derwall, Jeroen, Verwijmeren, Patrick, 2007. Corporate Social Responsibility and the

Cost of Equity Capital. Erasmus University Working Paper.

Hong, Harrison, Kacperczyk, Marcin, 2009. The price of sin: The effects of social norms

on markets. J. Financ. Econ. 93 (1), 15–36.

Krueger, Philipp, Sautner, Zacharias, Starks, Laura T., 2020. The importance of climate

risks for institutional investors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (3), 1067–1111.

Lintner, John, 1965. The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments

in stock portfolios and capital budgets. Rev. Econ. Stat. 47 (1), 13–37.

Luo, H. Arthur, Balvers, Ronald J., 2017. Social screens and systematic investor boycott

risk. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 52 (1), 365–399.

Mollet, Janick Christian, Ziegler, Andreas, 2014. Socially responsible investing and stock
performance: New empirical evidence for the US and European stock markets. Rev.
Financ. Econ. 23 (4), 208–216.

Mossin, Jan, 1966. Equilibrium in a capital asset market. Econometrica 34 (4), 768–783.
Oehmke, Martin, Opp, Marcus M., 2023. A Theory of Socially Responsible Investment.

Swedish House of Finance Research Paper, (20-2).

Pástor, Ľuboš, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian A., 2020. Sustainable investing in

equilibrium. J. Financ. Econ..

Pastor, Lubos, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian A., 2021. Dissecting Green Returns.

Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Pedersen,  Lasse  Heje,  Fitzgibbons,  Shaun,  Pomorski,  Lukasz,  2020.  Responsible

investing: The ESG-efficient frontier. J. Financ. Econ..

Renneboog, Luc, Horst, Jenke Ter, Zhang, Chendi, 2008. Socially responsible invest-
ments: Institutional aspects, performance, and investor behavior. J. Bank. Financ.
32 (9), 1723–1742.

Riedl, Arno, Smeets, Paul, 2017. Why do investors hold socially responsible mutual

Dimson, Elroy, Karakaş, Oğuzhan, Li, Xi, 2015. Active ownership. Rev. Financ. Stud.

funds? J. Finance 72 (6), 2505–2550.

28 (12), 3225–3268.

Durand,  Robert  B.,  Koh,  SzeKee,  Tan,  Paul  LiJian,  2013.  The  price  of  sin  in  the

Pacific-Basin. Pac.-Basin Finance J. 21 (1), 899–913.

Salaber, Julie, 2013. Religion and returns in Europe. Eur. J. Political Econ. 32, 149–160.
Sharpe, William F., 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under

conditions of risk. J. Finance 19 (3), 425–442.

Fabozzi, Frank J., Ma, K.C., Oliphant, Becky J., 2008. Sin stock returns. J. Portf. Manag.

Shleifer, Andrei, 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? J. Finance 41 (3),

35 (1), 82–94.

Feng, Zhi-Yuan, Wang, Ming-Long, Huang, Hua-Wei, 2015. Equity financing and social
responsibility: further international evidence. Int. J. Account. 50 (3), 247–280.
Ghoul, Sadok El, Guedhami, Omrane, Kwok, Chuck C.Y., Mishra, Dev R., 2011. Does
corporate social responsibility affect the cost of capital? J. Bank. Financ. 35 (9),
2388–2406.

Greenwood, Robin, Sammon, Marco C., 2022. The Disappearing Index Effect. Technical

Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harris, Lawrence, Gurel, Eitan, 1986. Price and volume effects associated with changes
in the S & P 500 list: New evidence for the existence of price pressures. J. Finance
41 (4), 815–829.

Heinkel, Robert, Kraus, Alan, Zechner, Josef, 2001. The effect of green investment on

corporate behavior. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 36 (4), 431–449.

579–590.

SIF, 2020. Report on US Sustainable and Impact Investing Trends. Technical Report,

The Forum for Sustainable and Responsible Investment.

Statman, Meir, Glushkov, Denys, 2016. Classifying and measuring the performance of

socially responsible mutual funds. J. Portf. Manag. 42 (2), 140–151.

Teoh, Siew Hong, Welch, Ivo, Wazzan, C. Paul, 1999. The effect of socially activist
investment  policies  on  the  financial  markets:  Evidence  from  the  South  African
boycott. J. Bus. 72 (1), 35–89.

Treynor, Jack, 1961. Toward a theory of the market value of risky assets.
Trinks, Arjan, Scholtens, Bert, Mulder, Machiel, Dam, Lammertjan, 2018. Fossil fuel

divestment and portfolio performance. Ecol. Econom. 146, 740–748.

van  Binsbergen,  Jules  H.,  2024.  Duration-based  stock  valuation:  reassessing  stock

market performance and volatility. J. Financ. Econ. Forthcoming.

16 

