Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Bank competition and household privacy in a digital payment monopoly✩

Itai Agur
IMF, 700 19th St NW, 20431, Washington DC, United States of America

, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia ∗

, Anil Ari

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Lenders can exploit households’ payment data to infer their creditworthiness. When households value privacy,
they then face a tradeoff between protecting such privacy and attaining better credit conditions. We study
how introducing an informationally more intrusive digital payment vehicle affects households’ cash use, credit
access, and welfare. A tech monopolist controls the intrusiveness of the new payment method and manipulates
information asymmetries among households and oligopolistic banks to extract data contracts that are more
lucrative than lending on its own. The laissez-faire equilibrium entails a digital payment vehicle that is more
intrusive than socially optimal, providing a rationale for regulation.

Dataset link: Mathematica file for ‘‘Bank Compe
tition and Household Privacy in a Digital Paym
ent Monopoly’’ (Original data)

JEL classification:
D82
E41
G21
G28

Keywords:
Privacy
Financial intermediation
BigTech
Data regulation

1.  Introduction

New payment technologies are making it increasingly easy to col-
lect information about consumer behavior, while network externalities
limit the number of viable payment providers and endow them with
significant market power in the collection of personal data.1 These data
can be parsed to infer a variety of personal characteristics that corpora-
tions can profitably exploit, including by deriving credit ratings based
on an individual’s spending behavior. In credit markets, such use of
payment data can reduce informational asymmetries and unlock market
segments where adverse selection may otherwise hinder the provision
of credit. There is growing evidence on the expansion of credit access

associated with new means of payment, including those issued by major
ecommerce or social media platforms known as BigTechs (Beck et al.,
2022; Berg et al., 2022; Doerr et al., 2025; Frost et al., 2020) .2 But this
may come at the expense of personal privacy. This is an acute concern
for many households, as documented in empirical literature discussed
in the next section. Further, market power in data collection may give
payment  providers  an  edge  that  alters  the  competitive  landscape  in
banking markets.

How will markets navigate tradeoffs between credit provision and
privacy?  Who  will  be  the  winners  and  losers  of  the  introduction  of
new forms of data collection? Does the rise of these new technologies
call  for  government  intervention?  In  this  paper,  we  shed  light  on

✩
Andreas Fuster was the editor for this article and we are thankful for his feedback. We are grateful to an anonymous referee for comments that greatly
helped to improve the paper. We would also like to thank Philip Bergmann, Yuteng Cheng, Rodney Garratt, Florian Heider, Peter Hoffmann, Jing Huang, Charles
Kahn, Artashes Karapetyan, Michael Junho Lee, Robert Marquez, Joseph Stiglitz and Sergio Vicente, and audiences at the 2024 IBEFA Annual Meetings, 2024
Bank of Portugal - CEPR Conference on Financial Intermediation, 2024 Bundesbank and Bank of Canada Conference on Payments and Securities Settlement, 2024
Federal Reserve Conference on the Interconnectedness of Financial Systems, 2023 Swiss Winter Conference on Financial Intermediation, 2023 Luiss-CEPR Finance
Workshop, 2023 Oxford Financial Intermediation Theory Conference, 2023 CEPR-Bocconi Conference on The Future of Payments, 2023 IMF Macro-Financial
Conference, the Bank of Canada, the BIS, Collegio Carlo Alberto Turin, and an internal IMF seminar for helpful comments. The views expressed are those of the
authors only and do not represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board or IMF management.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

iagur@imf.org (I. Agur), aari@imf.org (A. Ari), gdellariccia@imf.org (G. Dell’Ariccia).

1 Payment data are increasingly migrating to the platforms of leading information technology companies, some of which also encourage payment data migration
beyond their platforms. E.g., Amazon rewards consumers that share receipts of purchases outside Amazon (https://panel.amazon.com/); Alibaba and WeChat
provide widely used means of payment in China; and Meta has explored digital currency issuance.

2 The case of payment and credit provision by BigTechs in China has been most extensively studied. See, for example, Bian et al. (2024), Dong et al. (2025),

and Ouyang (2022).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104019
Received 27 October 2023; Received in revised form 28 January 2025; Accepted 29 January 2025
Available online 13 February 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. 

I. Agur et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

these questions by building a model in which a digital payment issuer
competes against an anonymous form of payment, cash. This presents
households with a choice between a payment method that precludes
information collection and another for which the issuer of the digital
payment vehicle determines the extent of informational intrusiveness,
i.e., what consumer data to collect and retain. For instance, for each
transaction the only data collected and retained could be the vendor
and the amount spent, similar to what happens with credit cards, or
instead reach the level of the specific items bought. Further, the data
collector could choose what segments of payment data to connect to
other sources of information about a specific individual: e.g., payment
data  could  be  linked  to  users’  activity  on  social  media  accounts  or
ecommerce platforms, as has been the case for, respectively, WeChat
Pay and Alipay in China. Alternatively, the payment provider could
introduce a digital currency with customizable privacy features.

In  our  model,  intrusiveness  is  a  choice  variable  for  the  payment
provider that determines the probability with which the digital pay-
ment vehicle reveals its users’ creditworthiness.

Households  are  consumer-entrepreneurs  that  differ  in  their  cred-
itworthiness  and  their  care  for  privacy,  both  of  which  are  private
information. They are endowed with a project but need external financ-
ing in order to realize it. The payment provider sells the information
it collects about consumer behavior to banks, which can exploit these
data  to  reduce  adverse  selection  when  competing  for  loans  to  bor-
rowers in an imperfectly competitive market. Spatial differentiation of
households and banks provides individual banks with market power, as
monitoring costs are lower for nearby borrowers.

When optimizing households choose between using cash and the
digital payment vehicle, they take into account how being observed
by the digital payment issuer affects their personal cost in terms of loss
of privacy and the potential revelation of their creditworthiness (and
thereby their borrowing conditions). Similarly, the payment provider
takes  this  optimizing  behavior  into  account  when  determining  the
intrusiveness  of  the  payment  vehicle.  How  much  data  the  provider
manages  to  collect  and  the  price  it  can  obtain  by  selling  these  to
lenders depends on the intrusiveness of the vehicle and on the portion
of consumers that choose to use it. Lenders observe the result of this
game, choose whether or not to buy payment data and can make loan
offers conditional on the information obtained.

The model’s equilibrium delivers four main results. First, the pay-
ment  provider  makes  the  payment  vehicle  as  intrusive  as  possible
(leading to certain revelation of creditworthiness type for all users).
The payment provider’s optimal strategy stems from adverse selection,
which it exploits to instigate a partially unraveling Market for Lemons.
This plays on the way that households sort into means of payment.
Households with low privacy costs and high creditworthiness want to
use the digital payment vehicle, while households with high privacy
costs  and  low  creditworthiness  opt  for  cash.  In  between,  there  are
households  that  would  choose  cash  if  everyone  chose  cash,  but  are
swept along in a disclosure cascade, because high quality households’
departure from cash worsens the average creditworthiness of the pool
of borrowers using cash and hence raises their equilibrium loan rate.
As  a  result  of  this  disclosure  externality,  the  market  share  of  the
digital payment vehicle increases with intrusiveness, despite the higher
privacy cost experienced by individual users.

A second result is that the payment provider maximizes data sale
revenues  by  offering  free  data  access  to  banks  outside  their  home
market. Banks compete à la Bertrand in the credit market and (under
symmetric information) a price-limit equilibrium emerges wherein each
bank serves and extracts surplus from borrowers in its home market and
unsuccessfully contests other markets. Hence, the home bank stands
to lose the most (and thus is willing to pay the most) from being cut
out of private information about borrowers’ creditworthiness, and its
willingness to pay for data is maximized by the threat of an asymmetric
equilibrium when out-of-home-market information is free to all banks.

The third result is that the payment provider prefers to sell infor-
mation  to  the  banks  rather  than  becoming  a lender  and walling  off
the  information  for  its  own  use.3 In  our  model,  this  outcome  stems
from the fact that the presence of cash makes the payment provider’s
monopoly  power  partly  contestable.  Should  the  provider  become  a
lender itself, it would use the payment information to gain monopoly
power over loan markets and thus extract all the surplus from borrow-
ers/consumers. Foreseeing this, consumers would all use cash, denying
the  digital  provider  any  informational  advantage  versus  competing
lenders. Competition among banks here acts as a commitment device
for the payment provider to share some of the surplus with borrowers.
The  ability  to  credibly  commit  to  lower  loan  rates  would  assuage
this outcome, but in the absence of perfect commitment devices, this
provides  a  counterbalance  to  the  integration  of  data  collection  and
credit provision in a data monopoly from, e.g., economies of scope.

These results come about in an economy where enough borrowers
have positive NPV projects that in equilibrium every project is financed,
regardless of borrower revelation status. While there will be winners
(households  with  a  low  care  for  privacy  and  high  creditworthiness)
and losers (other households), the aggregate effects of introducing the
digital  payment  vehicle  are  negative:  relative  to  a  cash-only  world,
aggregate output is unchanged and there are positive privacy costs. It
follows that under these circumstances a social planner would always
prefer a non-informative form of payment.

To  speak  to  the  potential  benefits  of  an  information  producing
payment vehicle, we next consider an economy where under certain
circumstances information disclosure leads to greater aggregate credit
access. Put simply, we consider states of the world under which the
absence  of  information  about  individual  borrowers  leads  to  a  mar-
ket shutdown. When the loan market for undifferentiated households
freezes, type differentiation generates social value. More intrusive data
collection now gives households with good credit quality a way to stand
out and obtain credit. This raises total credit provision and aggregate
welfare.

We use this framework to draw insights about the optimal regu-
lation  of  a  data  monopoly,  which  constitutes  our  fourth  key  result.
Regulation is envisaged as a slow-moving policy, determined before the
economic state materializes, and implemented as a constraint on the
intrusiveness of the monopolist’s data collection. Optimal regulation
here  trades  off  the  costs  of  intrusiveness  when  credit  provision  is
assured against its benefits during a credit crunch.

Furthermore, we find that there can be a role for a second policy
instrument, implemented as a tax or subsidy on households that opt for
the monopolist’s payment method. The reason that optimal policy with
two tools can raise welfare is that the amount of revealed household
data consists of two margins: one extensive (the share of households
opting for disclosure) and one intensive (the extent of revelation about
such households).

We highlight the extent to which the payment data monopoly ampli-
fies externalities in an extension wherein the digital payment system is
owned by a consortium of banks rather than a monopolist. The welfare
outcome is in between the monopolist and the social planner: the bank
consortium  neither  actively  exploits  nor  leans  against  the  disclosure
externalities.

Based  on  extensions,  we  also  find  that  our  results  do  not  hinge
on  payments  being  the  only  source  of  credit  quality  data.  The  key
assumption  is  that  the  new  means  of  payment  reveals  more  credit
quality information, not that it is the sole source of such information.
Lastly, we find that our results hold if the ability of the data monopolist

3 This resembles the case of India prior to the launch of its Unified Payment
Interface (UPI) in 2016. Before UPI, the prevailing digital payment monopoly
(Paytm) did not directly provide credit but instead used its data to act as a
fee-earning bridge between borrowers and lenders. On the changes brought
about by UPI see, e.g., Alok et al. (2024).

2 

I. Agur et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

to infer credit quality depends positively on the number of users of its
payment system.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section
reviews  the  related  literature.  Section 3 presents  the  setup  of  the
model. Section 4 derives the equilibria wherein the data monopolist
sells the data to lenders and Section 5 shows why it chooses to do so
instead of engaging in credit provision itself. Section 6 analyzes welfare
and socially optimal policy design. Section 7 summarizes the model
extensions. Proofs and additional modeling detail behind some of the
extensions are provided in the Online Appendix.

Empirically,  although  the  value  of  digital  privacy  in  general  is
debated  (Goldfarb and Que, 2023; Chen et al., 2021), for payments
and lending specifically most studies find an important role for pri-
vacy. Doerr et al. (2023) and Tang (2023) document borrowers’ will-
ingness  to  pay  to  limit  the  intrusiveness  of  data  disclosure  in  loan
applications; and various studies find that privacy is an important deter-
minant of payment choice.6 Moreover, several studies report extensive
heterogeneity in privacy preferences among households, in line with
our assumption.7

2.  Related literature

3.  Model

Our paper builds on classical work on optimal disclosure (Jovanovic,
1982; Grossman and Hart, 1980) and relates to a growing literature
on emerging financial technologies in payments and credit provision.
Like us, Parlour et al. (2022) and He et al. (2023) consider borrowers
that are heterogeneous in both credit quality and a second dimension
(respectively, bank affinity and privacy), and data externalities among
such borrowers take center stage. In Parlour et al. (2022), payment
providers compete against a bank and externalities stem from coupling
data garnered from payment services with credit provision. He et al.
(2023) also consider lending market competition between banks and
financial-technology  driven  entrants,  and  show  that  household  data
ownership is suboptimal as individual data sharing decisions lead to
aggregate credit quality inferences by lenders.4

Different from these studies, we consider a data monopolist that
stands  upstream  and  controls  the  flow  of  information,  actively  ex-
ploiting  information  asymmetries  and  data  externalities.  In  essence,
we  model  a  BigTech,  whereas Parlour  et  al. (2022)  and He  et  al.
(2023) model competing FinTechs (companies that automate financial
services,  but  generally  do  not  enter  the  market  with  the  dominant
networks that BigTechs derive from ecommerce or social media plat-
forms).5 Unlike  the  FinTechs,  our  BigTech  determines  the  extent  of
intrusiveness of its data collection, while it competes with cash, which
allows households to opt out of its data web. This lays bare the incen-
tives of a data monopolist to play off households and banks against
each other.

Several papers consider the role of new forms of digital payments
in the preservation of privacy. In Garratt and Van Oordt (2021), the
social value of a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) derives from
privacy being a public good: taking actions to protect digital privacy is
costly to a consumer, while firms use data collected through payments
to price discriminate future consumers. In Garratt and Lee (2021), the
CBDC raises welfare compared to household ownership of their own
data: either policy can fend off the endogenous formation of data mo-
nopolies, but household data ownership leads to data underprovision,
which hampers firms’ ability to match products to consumer prefer-
ences. Ahnert et al. (2022), Kahn and van Oordt (2023), Tan (2024),
and Tinn (2024)  consider  digital  payments  that  are  programmable,
such as through the inclusion of customizable data sharing features.
Different from us, these papers do not focus on hidden quality problems
in credit markets.

4 In Huang (2021)  banks  compete  with  lenders  that  rely  on  data  from
linked ecommerce platforms while banks rely on physical collateral, leading
to different borrower type specializations.

5 Information  flow  on  ecommerce  platforms  provides  a  different  angle
on  BigTechs. Bouvard  et  al. (2022)  focus  on  monitoring  efficiency  differ-
ences between an ecommerce platform and banks that compete on loans to
the  platform’s  merchants.  In Brunnermeier  and  Payne (2023), Gambacorta
et  al. (2022)  and Li  and  Pegoraro (2023)  platforms  have  an  enforcement
advantage, as defaulting firms can face exclusion from the platform. For the
broader literature on platform data and externalities, see, e.g., Acemoglu et al.
(2022), Bergemann and Bonatti (2024), Bergemann et al. (2022), and Cong
and Mayer (2023).

3 

We consider an economy populated by three sets of agents. Consumer-

entrepreneurs, to which we refer to as households, form the first set.
Second, there is a monopolist digital payment provider, which, to fix
ideas, we term a digital currency issuer .8 Lenders comprise the third set
of agents.9 All agents are risk neutral. The economy is distributed across
𝑁 > 3 connected islands. Each island hosts one lender and a continuum
of households with mass 1. A lender on the same island as a borrower is
called the borrower’s home lender, and borrowers on the same island as
a lender are referred to as the lender’s on-island borrowers. All islands
share the same physical currency (cash) and digital currency issuer.

3.1.  Households

Each household is characterized by three variables: its creditwor-
thiness and preference for privacy, which are private information, and
the island where it lives, which is publicly observable. The last is self-
explanatory. Let us turn to the first two. A household is born with an
investment project that can only be brought to fruition with financing
from a lender. All projects yield the same payoff, 𝑦, when successful and
0 otherwise. However, the probability that a project succeeds, 𝑞, differs
across  households.  We  refer  to 𝑞 as  a  household’s  credit  quality  or
creditworthiness. Households also differ in their preference for privacy
or, put differently, their perceived cost of having their consumption
patterns  scrutinized.  Each  household  attaches  disutility 𝜑 to  its  loss
of  privacy.  On  each  island,  the  mass 1 of  households  is  uniformly
distributed on a two-dimensional plane with 𝑞 ∈
and 𝜑 ∈ [0, 2].10
A household’s credit quality and privacy preferences are independent
of each other.

]
, 1

[ 1
2

6 See Borgonovo  et  al. (2021), Brits  and  Jonker (2023), Choi  et  al.

(2023), Cunliffe (2023), ECB (2021), Engels et al. (2022), and Li (2023).

7 See Armantier  et  al. (2021, 2024), Bian  et  al. (2023), Budak  et  al.
(2023), Collis  et  al. (2024), Cupak  et  al. (2024), Goldfarb  and  Tucker
(2012), Jiang  et  al. (2023), Lin (2022), Lin  and  Strulov-Shlain (2023)
and Prince and Wallsten (2022).

8 Its business model, based on the collection and sale of data, is akin to
Meta Platforms, while the notion of a digital currency resembles the Libra and
Diem initiatives. We do not model what gives rise to a monopoly here, such
as network effects in means of payment (Agur et al., 2022).

9 We here use the term lenders instead of banks, because the way they
are modeled (Section 3.3) is general enough to encompass nonbank lenders,
including FinTechs.
instead of 𝑞 ∈ [0, 1], as the latter complicates the
10 We choose 𝑞 ∈
identification of simple parameter conditions to characterize equilibria (see,
e.g., Table 1). This is without loss of generality, since all possibilities on the
]
functioning of the loan market are covered (Section 4). Given 𝑞 ∈
, we
let 𝜑 ∈ [0, 2] instead of 𝜑 ∈ [0, 1] to obtain a unit mass of households on each
island.

[ 1
2

[ 1
2

, 1

, 1

]

I. Agur et al.

3.1.1.  Household consumption

Households  are  born  with  an  endowment  that  they  use  towards
consumption. To avoid complicating the model excessively, we assume
that this consumption is needed to meet subsistence needs (i.e., none
of the endowment can be saved or used as collateral when requesting
credit).  However,  an  individual  household’s  consumption  pattern,  if
observed, may carry information about its creditworthiness.

Each household chooses between cash and the digital currency (DC)
to pay for consumption. Cash fully protects the household’s privacy. If
instead the household uses the DC then with some probability, 𝜃, the
DC issuer is able to infer the household’s creditworthiness.

The household experiences privacy disutility 𝜑 from being observed
by  the  DC  issuer.  Households  understand  the extent to  which  their
behavior  is  observed  by  the  DC  issuer.  That  extent,  captured  by 𝜃,
determines both the household’s privacy disutility and the probability
of type revelation. We assume that households are unable to predict
how their consumption choices affect their credit score (i.e., households
have no visibility into the algorithm used to extract creditworthiness
information from consumption patterns). For a practical example, con-
sider  the  case  of  a  social  media  company  that  can  choose  whether
to link households’ payment and social media data (e.g., WeChat has
derived credit ratings from linked payment and social media data). The
decision to link these data is observed by households, and disliked (to
varying degrees) from a privacy angle by those who choose to use DC.
But the way in which social media chats interact with payment data
is likely poorly understood by households, and they therefore neither
consume nor chat strategically.

3.2.  Digital currency issuer

The DC issuer is in control of the design of the digital currency.
Formally, it chooses the probability, 𝜃, with which it will be able to
learn the creditworthiness of individual households using the DC. The
DC  issuer  is  a  monopolist  in  the  provision  of  digital  payments  and
hence also sets the price at which its collected digital payment data
are made available to lenders. Note that in this section we focus on
the case of a DC issuer that puts these data up for sale to lenders and
does itself not engage in lending.11 Section 5 considers the possibility
that  the  DC  issuer  would  instead  provide  credit,  either  directly  or
through a subsidiary lender, and shows that this will never emerge as
an equilibrium.

The DC issuer may charge lenders differentiated fees for information
on borrowers on and off their islands. Here, 𝛺𝑖𝑗 denotes the data access
fee that the digital currency provider charges lender 𝑖 for access to data
on households on island 𝑗. We define 𝐷𝑖𝑗
as lender 𝑖’s demand
function for data on households on island 𝑗. This demand function will
take value 0 (do not purchase) or 1 (purchase) depending on the pricing
of the data access, 𝛺𝑖𝑗 , and the value that a lender derives from the
data.12 How much a lender is willing to spend on data gathered from DC
users, will depend on how much borrower data the DC issuer obtained,
which  in  turn  relates  to  the  intrusiveness  of  the  DC.  Therefore, 𝐷𝑖𝑗

(𝜃 , 𝛺𝑖𝑗

)

11 The  DC  issuer  can  market  credit  quality  data  but  not  a  list  of  which
households  open  a  DC  account.  The  latter  would  lead  to  two  pools  of
unrevealed households: cash users and unrevealed DC users, opening the model
to mimicking strategies (e.g., low 𝑞 households may gamble on DC use, hoping
to  end  up  among  the  unrevealed  DC  users),  considerably  complicating  the
analysis. However, allowing households to open unused DC accounts would
restore our baseline setup. Opening such an account directly sorts a household
into  the  pool  of  unrevealed  DC  users,  which  have  a  higher  average  credit
quality than cash users (see Section 4). All cash users would do so, as it would
come without privacy costs, leading to the same single pool of unrevealed
households as in our baseline.
12 Data  access  sales  can  be  made  subject  to  non-disclosure  agreements
(NDAs). Such NDAs are here taken as legally binding and enforceable (i.e., data
resales are precluded).

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

)
.  The  DC  issuer’s  objective  is  to
is  written  as  a  function  of
maximize data fee revenue by choosing 𝜃 and 𝛺𝑖𝑗 . This can be written
as

(𝜃 , 𝛺𝑖𝑗

max
𝜃∈[0,1],𝛺𝑖𝑗

∑

∑

𝛺𝑖𝑗 𝐷𝑖𝑗

(𝜃 , 𝛺𝑖𝑗

)

𝑖∈[1,𝑁]

𝑗∈[1,𝑁]

(1)

3.3.  Lenders

Lenders in our model face an infinitely elastic supply of funding
at  cost 𝑐𝑓 ≥ 1 and  engage  in  Bertrand  competition  for  loans  to
households, which (to sustain limit-pricing equilibria) we assume have
a breakeven preference in favor of their home lender. Lenders have two
sources of differentiation. The first is their access to information about
households’ credit quality. If one lender purchases detailed data on a
set of households, while other lenders do not, the purchasing lender
can charge differentiated loan rates to attract the subset of households
with high credit quality, leaving other lenders a pool of lower credit
quality borrowers.

The second source of differentiation stems from the cost of monitor-
ing borrowers. Unmonitored borrowers are assumed to always run off
with the loan principal. Monitoring prevents loan theft with certainty
but is costly. Monitoring a borrower on the same island costs a home
lender 𝑐𝑚
ℎ .  Monitoring  at  distance  is  more  costly:  away  (off-island)
lenders  incur  a  cost  of 𝑐𝑚
ℎ + 𝜏,  where 𝜏  > 0 parameterizes
the monitoring cost advantage of home lenders. The relation between
physical distance and monitoring costs is well-established in the litera-
ture  (Agarwal and Hauswald, 2010; Heitz et al., 2023).13 To simplify
notation,  we  let 𝑐 = 𝑐𝑓 + 𝑐𝑚
ℎ represent  the  combined  cost  of  loan
provision and monitoring to a home lender and therefore 𝑐 + 𝜏 is that
cost for away lenders.

𝑎 = 𝑐𝑚

We can express lender 𝑖’s expected profits in general form (with

closed forms following as part of the derivations in Section 4):
(𝐸 [𝑞𝑖𝑘𝑅𝑖𝑘
)
(𝑞𝑖𝑘
(𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] 𝑅𝑖𝑢 − 𝑐) (𝜐𝑖ℎ + 𝜐𝑖𝑎

− 𝑐) (𝑚𝑖ℎ + 𝑚𝑖𝑎

− 𝑚𝑖𝑎𝜏 +
∑

(𝜃 , 𝛺𝑖𝑗

− 𝜐𝑖𝑎𝜏 −

𝛺𝑖𝑗 𝐷𝑖𝑗

)]

)

)

(2)

𝑗∈[1,𝑁]

)]

(𝑞𝑖𝑘

Lender 𝑖’s profit consists of three parts. The first is the expected profit
on revealed borrowers whose credit type the lender has obtained. Here,
𝑚𝑖ℎ and 𝑚𝑖𝑎 are endogenous variables representing, respectively, the
masses  of  on-island  and  off-island  revealed  households  who  choose
to  borrow  from  lender 𝑖.  A  household, 𝑘,  whose  credit  quality  data
the lender has obtained, and who has chosen to borrow from lender
𝑖,  is  denoted  by 𝑖𝑘.  A  lender’s  expectation  (over  borrower  types)  of
)
(𝑞𝑖𝑘
the revenue it makes on all loans with customized loan rates 𝑅𝑖𝑘
is 𝐸 [𝑞𝑖𝑘𝑅𝑖𝑘
while its cost is 𝑐 for the mass 𝑚𝑖ℎ and (𝑐 + 𝜏) for
the mass 𝑚𝑖𝑎. The second term is the expected profit that the lender
makes from unrevealed borrowers. The masses of such borrowers on-
island and off-island, respectively, are denoted by 𝜐𝑖ℎ and 𝜐𝑖𝑎. For every
loan that the lender provides to an unrevealed borrower, the expected
profit is 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] 𝑅𝑖𝑢 − 𝑐 and 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] 𝑅𝑖𝑢 − (𝑐 + 𝜏), respectively, on-island
and off-island. Here, 𝑖𝑢 denotes the unrevealed households that choose
to  borrow  from  lender 𝑖, 𝑅𝑖𝑢 is  the  pooled  loan  rate  that  lender 𝑖
charges  unrevealed  borrowers,  and 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] represents  the  expected
credit quality of households conditional on being unrevealed. The third
term  is  the  lender’s  cost  if  it  chooses  to  purchase  data  on  revealed
borrowers from the DC issuer, as per (1).

3.3.1.  Household borrowing and payoff

Households  are  protected  by  limited  liability.  They  may  borrow
from any lender. The expected payoff for a household of type (𝑞 , 𝜑),
considering both the potential gains from borrowing and the costs of
privacy, can then be written as

13 See also discussions in Vives and Ye (2025).

4 

I. Agur et al.

𝑢 (𝑞 , 𝜑) =

{

𝜃 𝑞 max

{𝑦 − 𝑅𝑘 (𝑞) , 0

𝑞 max
}

}

{𝑦 − 𝑅𝑢, 0
+ (1 − 𝜃) 𝑞 max

if using cash
}
{𝑦 − 𝑅𝑢, 0

− 𝛼 𝜑𝜃 if using DC

}

(3)
}
{𝑦 − 𝑅𝑢, 0
If the household chooses cash it expects a return of 𝑞 max
on its project, where 𝑅𝑢 is the prevailing (i.e., lowest-available) loan
rate  on  the  unrevealed  market;  if  the  household  chooses  DC,  it  has
a 𝜃 probability  of  becoming  revealed,  in  which  case  it  receives  the
prevailing loan rate on type-differentiated households, 𝑅𝑘 (𝑞).14 When
a DC user remains unrevealed, which occurs with probability (1 − 𝜃),
then  it  borrows  at  the  unrevealed  rate,  like  a  cash  user.  Lastly,  the
term 𝛼 𝜑𝜃 represents the privacy cost that a household incurs from using
DC,  where  the  parameter 𝛼  > 0 is  the  common  weight  on  privacy
preferences,  while 𝜑,  as  discussed,  is  the  heterogeneous  individual
privacy preference parameter.

For  simplicity,  the  baseline  model  does  not  incorporate  an  addi-
tional term to represent an ease-of-transactions benefit of DC relative
to  cash.  We  note,  however,  that  cash  is  merely  one  example  of  an
alternative payment instrument. For example, our modeled alternative
to the DC could equally well be a privacy-preserving crypto asset, which
may not have a transaction disadvantage relative to the DC.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

observe market-wide rates (i.e., for generic borrowers, like on our un-
revealed market) when they decide on customized offers to (potential)
clients that they know more about, such as their own depositors. In our
case, the latter group is comprised of households on which lenders have
purchased data.

Based on the Stage 4 loan rates, in turn, households decide from
which  lender  to  borrow  to  finance  their  projects  at  Stage  5.  Lastly,
at Stage 6, project returns materialize and households with successful
projects repay their lenders.

4.  Equilibria

Below we derive the subgame-perfect equilibrium of the model laid
out  in  Section 3.5.  We  consider  three  different  cases  with  varying
proportions of good borrowers (with positive NPV projects, i.e., 𝑞 𝑦 > 𝑐)
and bad borrowers (with negative NPV projects, i.e., 𝑞 𝑦 < 𝑐). We obtain
this variation by changing the yield of successful projects, as shown in
Table 1.

Table 1
Parameterizing the share of bad borrowers.
Case

Share of bad (NPV < 0) borrowers
Small

Value of 𝑦
𝑦 > 2 (𝑐 + 𝜏)
( 4
𝑐 , 2 (𝑐 + 𝜏)
𝑦 ∈
3
)
(
𝑐 , 4

𝑦 ∈

𝑐

3

)

3.4.  Parameter conditions

High 𝑦

We include three parameter conditions. First, we let

𝑐 < 𝑦

(4)

Intermediate 𝑦

Medium

Low 𝑦

Large

which ensures that the highest quality borrower (𝑞 = 1) always has a
positive NPV project. This is a necessary condition for credit provision
to take place. Second, we let

Sections 4.1 and 4.2 analyze the “High 𝑦” and “Low 𝑦” case, respec-
tively. The “Intermediate 𝑦” case is a direct extension of the other two
cases and is discussed in the Appendix.

𝜏 < 𝑦 − 𝑐

(5)

4.1.  Equilibrium in the ‘‘High 𝑦’’ case

because competition in lending plays a central role in our analysis and
when 𝜏 ≥ 𝑦−𝑐, the cost for monitoring at a distance is too large and each
lender becomes an uncontested monopoly for its on-island borrowers.
Third, we assume that

𝛼 <

𝑐 + 𝜏
6

(6)

which is necessary and sufficient to ensure that households with the
highest credit quality (𝑞 = 1) will always want to disclose their type.
This helps preserve tractability.

3.5.  Timing

The timing of agents’ actions and the realization of events is shown
in Fig. 1. At Stage 1, households are born with an endowment and a
project opportunity, and the DC issuer chooses the DC design, 𝜃, and
data  access  fees, 𝛺𝑖𝑗 .  At  Stage  2,  households  observe 𝜃 and  decide
whether  to  transact  with  DC  or  cash  and  consume,  after  which  DC
users’ creditworthiness becomes revealed with probability 𝜃. At Stage
3, lenders decide on data access purchases.

At Stage 4, each lender announces its loan rates. Stage 4 consists
of  two  substages:  first,  lenders  announce  a  single  loan  rate  towards
households  whose  creditworthiness  they  are  uninformed  on,  which
we  call  the  unrevealed  market  substage;  subsequently,  lenders  an-
nounce their loan rate offers for households that they are informed on
(namely, revealed households on which they have purchased data). We
term the latter the revealed market substage. This sequencing of loan
markets facilitates derivations and is quite standard in the literature
(Sharpe, 1990; Petersen  and  Rajan, 1995; Dell’Ariccia  et  al., 1999;
Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2004). For instance, lenders can generally

Proposition 1. When 𝑦  > 2 (𝑐 + 𝜏), all households borrow from their
respective home lenders at Stage 5, which, at Stage 4, offer the differentiated
loan rates in (7) to revealed borrowers and the single loan rate in (8) to
unrevealed borrowers.15
𝑐 + 𝜏
𝑞
𝑐 + 𝜏
𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢]

𝑅𝑘 (𝑞) =

𝑅𝑢 =

(8)

(7)

All lenders obtain data access at Stage 3. At Stage 2, households sort into
DC use if
𝜑 ≤ 𝑐 + 𝜏
𝛼

− 1

(9)

(

)

𝑞
𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢]

where

𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] =

2𝜃 − 1 +

)2

(4𝜃 − 3) 𝜃

√

( 𝛼
𝑐+𝜏

1 − 𝜃 + 4
3
(
( 𝛼
𝑐+𝜏

1 − 4
3

2𝜃

)2)

(10)

and choose cash otherwise. The mass of revealed borrowers (per island) is
given by

𝑚 =

2𝜃

(
(𝑐 + 𝜏)2 − 4
3

)

𝛼2

− (𝑐 + 𝜏) (𝛼 + 𝑐 + 𝜏)

(2𝜃 − 1) +

(

(𝑐 + 𝜏)2 − 4
3

𝛼2

√

1 − 𝜃 + 4

3

)

)2

( 𝛼
𝑐+𝜏

(4𝜃 − 3) 𝜃

(11)

and, at Stage 1, the DC issuer charges each lender positive data access fees
for information about its on-island households, and offers each lender free

14 The expression is of the form 𝑞 max {., 0} because even a successful project
could,  in  principle,  violate  the  limited  liability  constraint  when 𝑅 is  large
enough. This will not occur in equilibrium, however.

15 We drop the subscripts 𝑖 in (7) and (8), in view of home lender symmetry
(each lender is a home lender to a given set of households).

5 

I. Agur et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

Fig. 1. Timing and actions.

information about off-island households. The DC issuer sets 𝜃 = 1, which
maximizes data fee revenues.

Proof. See Appendix A.1. ■

In what follows, we describe the main mechanisms at play in the
equilibrium,  while  alluding  briefly  to  the  off-equilibrium  paths,  the
detailed discussions of which are left to Appendix A.1. We follow the
decision stages of the game in backward order.

Stage 5. Households borrow from the lender that offers them the

lowest loan rate.

Stage 4. When lenders are symmetrically informed (or uninformed),
meaning they all bought (or refused to buy) information from the DC
issuer at Stage 3, Stage 4 is a standard Bertrand game which admits
a unique limit-pricing equilibrium. When all lenders are informed, on
each island, competition among symmetric away lenders pushes their
expected  profits  from  on-island  borrowers  to  zero,  leading  them  to
offer revealed borrowers a rate conditional on their type defined by
(7) and unrevealed borrowers the single rate in (8). Each home lender
matches these rates and (due to the assumed breakeven rule) serves
all borrowers on its island, making positive profits off them due to its
positional rent. For the case in which no lender is informed, the same
logic applies, with 𝑐+𝜏
emerging as the loan rate that all lenders offer
𝐸[𝑞]
all borrowers.

The asymmetric information cases are more intricate and we refer
to Appendix A.1 for their details. We note two points arising from these
cases. The first is that, if away lenders are informed, the home lender
makes more profit when informed than when uninformed. Hindered
by its inability to differentiate, the uninformed home lender charges
only one loan rate and faces adverse selection among revealed bor-
rowers that receive type-differentiated offers from away lenders. The
second point is that when the home lender is informed while the away
lenders are not, revealed borrowers do not get lower loan rate offers
than unrevealed ones: the informed home lender always matches any
undifferentiated rate offer of away lenders for borrowers that the home
lender can profitably lend to at that rate.

Stage 3. At this stage, lenders decide whether or not to buy the data
provided by the DC issuer. At Stage 4, lenders make zero profits on off-
island borrowers (due to symmetric Bertrand competition). It follows
that, at Stage 3, they are not willing to pay a positive price for in-
formation about these borrowers. Hence, they only obtain information
on off-island borrowers if they are provided with free data access. In
contrast, lenders do make positive profits on their on-island borrowers
and they are willing to pay fees up to the difference in expected profits
between being informed and uninformed about these borrowers.

Stage 2. At Stage 2, households observe the DC design, 𝜃, and the
data fees, and foresee the subgame equilibrium prevailing at Stage 4

6 

and hence the expected loan rates and payoffs from using cash versus
DC. Based on its 𝑞 and 𝜑, each household compares its expected payoffs
in (3) from using cash (and remaining unrevealed) versus using DC (and
becoming revealed to informed lenders with probability 𝜃). When all
lenders are informed, then household choice leads to the sorting condi-
tion in (9). Note that since expected loan rates for unrevealed borrowers
depend on the credit quality of the pool of unrevealed households, a
household’s payment choice is affected by other households’ payment
choices.

4

and 𝑅𝑢 = 4
3

A  comparison  to  a  cash-only  (or,  equivalently, 𝜃 =  0)  setting  is
useful to highlight these interactions. Without DC, all households use
cash so that 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] = 𝐸 [𝑞] = 3
(𝑐 + 𝜏). At this loan rate,
some households will find it attractive to use a 𝜃 > 0 DC, when given
that option. This set of households is to the right of and below the
dashed line in Fig. 2. Since these households are located in the corner
with the highest credit quality and some of them become revealed, their
choice to use DC lowers 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] and raises 𝑅𝑢. With a lower 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢],
more households find that the condition in (9) holds, and choose DC
over cash. These households are near (to the left of) the threshold given
by the dashed line, meaning that their credit quality is high among cash
users. Their choice to use the DC in turn further lowers 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢], and
so on. The equilibrium in Proposition 1 documents the ultimate settle
point of such a process, as represented by the unbroken line in Fig. 2.
But  behind  this  equilibrium  lies  a  cascade  of  disclosure:  households
that only choose to use the DC because other, higher credit quality
households choose to do so. Households in between the dashed and
unbroken lines in Fig. 2 can be worse off than if the DC did not exist,
which highlights the public good nature of privacy here.

Fig. 2. Payment choice and disclosure cascades.

I. Agur et al.

The subgame where all lenders are informed has the highest DC
use among households, because every revealed household is offered a
type-differentiated rate. When all lenders are uninformed, type differ-
entiation is obviously impossible and therefore all households would
choose  cash  at  Stage  2  if  they  expected  that  subgame  for  Stage  4,
since  cash  comes  without  a  privacy  cost.  When  the  home  lender  is
informed  but  the  away  lenders  are  not  then,  as  noted  at  Stage  4,
revealed borrowers do not obtain lower loan rates than the unrevealed
and,  therefore,  all  households  again  choose  cash  at  Stage  2.  When
the home lender is uninformed and competes against informed away
lenders,  those  households  that  foresee  that  they  can  obtain  a  lower
undifferentiated loan rate from the home lender than a differentiated
rate from the away lenders, always choose cash. This leads to (weakly)
more cash use than when all lenders are informed.

Stage 1. The DC issuer sets 𝜃 and data access fees to maximize its
profit. Based on Stage 2, it foresees zero DC uptake (and zero profit)
when the away lenders are uninformed. Away lenders cannot pay a
positive fee for data access and therefore the DC issuer gives them the
data for free. It then charges the home lender a data access fee equal
to the profit that the lender gains from being informed, which we show
(in Appendix A.1) is maximized for 𝜃 = 1. Hence, the DC issuer designs
a maximally intrusive DC.16

4.2.  Equilibrium in the ‘‘Low 𝑦’’ case

)

(
𝑐 , 4
3

: households that can borrow do so
Proposition 2. When 𝑦 ∈
𝑐
from their respective home lenders at Stage 5. At Stage 4, revealed borrower
loan rates are given by (7), while lenders make no loan rate offers to the
unrevealed. At Stage 3, lenders obtain data access from the DC issuer. At
Stage 2, households with
𝑞 ≥ 𝛼 𝜑 + 𝑐 + 𝜏

(12)

𝑦

choose to use the DC and others use cash. At Stage 1, the DC issuer sets
𝜃 =  1, while offering lenders free data on their off-island borrowers and
charging them the fee 𝑚𝜏 for data on their on-island borrowers where

𝑚 =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝜃
(𝑦 − 𝑐 − 𝜏)2 if 𝑦 < 2𝛼 + 𝑐 + 𝜏
2𝛼 𝑦
(
1 − 𝛼+𝑐+𝜏
if 𝑦 > 2𝛼 + 𝑐 + 𝜏
2𝜃

)

𝑦

(13)

See  Appendix  A.2.  A  summary  of  the  main  mechanisms  is

Proof.
included below. ■

Stage 5. Each household borrows from the lender that offers it the

lowest loan rate.

(

Stage 4. When 𝑦 ∈

)
𝑐 , 4
, uninformed lenders never make loan
𝑐
3
offers.  The  intuition  for  this  is  straightforward: 𝑦  < 4
𝑐 means  that
3
lending to all households is never viable, because 𝐸 [𝑞] 𝑦−𝑐 = 3
𝑦−𝑐 < 0,
4
where 𝑦 is the highest conceivable loan rate and 𝑐 is the lowest cost
of  providing  loans.  An  uninformed  lender  can  never  have  a  better
expected credit quality than 𝐸 [𝑞] on its pool of borrowers: if some other
lender(s) is (are) informed, then the uninformed lender faces adverse
selection, leaving it with an average borrower quality below 𝐸 [𝑞]; if,
instead, all lenders are uninformed, then all lenders face a borrower
pool of quality 𝐸 [𝑞].

Thus,  only  informed  lenders  make  loan  offers.  When  all  lenders
are informed, this leads to the usual limit pricing equilibrium towards
those  borrowers  that  are  viable  for  all  lenders.  We  note  that  with
, there are some households that only have positive NPV
𝑦 ∈
projects when borrowing from the home lender, and the home lender

(
𝑐 , 4
3

)

𝑐

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

is an uncontested monopolist (charging 𝑦) towards such households, if
they are revealed. When only the home lender is informed, then it is an
uncontested monopolist towards all viable households. And when the
home lender is uninformed and the away lenders are informed, limit
pricing emerges (towards viable households).

Stage 3. Lenders make no profits when uninformed and therefore
are willing to pay up to all the profits they make when informed to
obtain data access.

Stage  2.  Whenever  lenders  are  uninformed  about  off-island  bor-
rowers,  all  households  choose  cash  because:  (a)  when  their  home
lender also does not have access to information about them, no credit
provision  takes  place  and  there  is  no  benefit  to  choosing  DC;  (b)
when instead their home lender is informed, then at Stage 4 it is an
uncontested monopolist and extracts all project value from revealed
households and, foreseeing this, all households choose cash at Stage
2, from the angle of privacy preservation.

When  lenders  are  informed  about  off-island  borrowers,  we  can
distinguish  three  groups  of  households:  (1)  households  with 𝑞  < 𝑐
𝑦
choose  cash,  because  their  projects  are  unviable  to  all  lenders;  (2)
households with 𝑞 ∈
also choose cash because they either face
an uncontested monopolist lender (if their home lender is informed)
or  are  credit  excluded  (when  their  home  lender  is  uninformed);  (3)
households with 𝑞 > 𝑐+𝜏
face a limit pricing environment because their
𝑦
projects are viable to away lenders. Among such households, those that
satisfy the condition in (12) choose DC.

, 𝑐+𝜏
𝑦

[ 𝑐
𝑦

]

Stage 1. The DC issuer provides lenders with free data access on
off-island households, since otherwise all households choose cash at
Stage 2. The DC issuer charges lenders a fee (marginally below) the
full profits that they make on their on-island revealed households, 𝑚𝜏,
which it knows the lenders will accept at Stage 3. The DC issuer then
optimizes profits by maximizing 𝑚 and this is achieved by setting 𝜃 = 1
(as apparent from (13)).

5.  Data usage strategies

So  far,  we  have  focused  on  a  DC  issuer  that  markets  its  data  to
lenders. This section considers a DC issuer that uses its data advantage
to engage in lending on its own, without selling data to other lenders.
The setup has an identical structure of lenders as in the baseline, with
one lender based on each island. We assume that, in addition, the DC
issuer has a branch on every island. Thus, if the DC issuer provides
credit, its cost of monitoring borrowers is the same as a home lender.
The timing of the game is as described in Section 3.5, except that: at
Stage 1, the DC issuer only determines 𝜃 but does not set data access
fees; Stage 3 on lender data purchases is inactive (since no data are put
up for sale); and at Stage 4, both the DC issuer and all lenders set loan
rates.

This setup leads to a stark outcome, formalized in Proposition 3: all
households choose cash and the DC issuer makes no profit. The reason
is that, regardless of its 𝑞, a revealed borrower never obtains a lower
borrowing cost than unrevealed borrowers. In the “High 𝑦” case, all
𝑐
in the Stage 4 equilibrium; and
borrowers are offered loan rate
𝐸[ 𝑞|𝑢]
in the “Low 𝑦” case, uninformed lenders do not bid at all due to adverse
selection, like in Proposition 2, meaning that, towards borrowers to
which it can profitably lend, the informed DC issuer is an uncontested
monopoly and charges rate 𝑦.

Proposition 3. The DC issuer makes zero profit if it provides loans rather
than selling data access to lenders. This holds for both the “High 𝑦” and
“Low 𝑦 ” cases in Table 1.

Proof. See Appendix A.3. ■

16 Notably, setting 𝜃 =  1 not only maximizes the odds of revelation per
DC user but, due to cascades, also maximizes the mass of DC users (see the
derivations for this stage in Appendix A.1).

The fundamental problem for the DC issuer here is the ability of
households to opt out of DC use when they foresee undifferentiated
loan rates, which originate in the loan market power of a sole informed

7 

I. Agur et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

lender. Unmodeled factors, like economies of scope, may plead for the
integration of data collection and credit provision. Nevertheless, the
notion that there is a benefit for the data monopolist to be a “puppet
master”,  who  manipulates  information  asymmetries  from  above  but
does not directly get involved in credit markets, is powerful; and so
is  the  absence  of  a  fully  credible  way  to  pre-commit  not  to  exploit
the market power inherent in a data monopoly, after households have
given up their data  (Liu et al., 2025) . Market power in lending is a
double-edged sword in a setting like this: it could facilitate higher loan
revenues, but only if enough households stay put and the prospect of
rent extraction does not push too many of them to opt out of disclosure
altogether.17

6.  Policy analysis

We now draw insights from our model for the analysis and design of
socially optimal policy. In particular, we consider the role of regulation
to constrain the DC’s intrusiveness.

To enable the welfare analysis, we extend our model by adding two
more  stages  to  the  game  described  in  Section 3.5.  First,  we  assume
that the policy maker determines regulation at the beginning of the
game, which represents the notion that regulation is a long-term policy
that  is  infrequently  revised.  We  denote  socially  optimal  DC  design
by 𝜃 and  implement  regulation  as  a  constraint  on  the  intrusiveness
of  data  collection.18 That  is,  the  DC  issuer  now  faces  a  constrained
]
[
design  choice  such  that 𝜃 ∈
.  Second,  we  let 𝑦 represent  an
0, 𝜃
uncertain  aggregate  state,  exogenously  determined  in  a  third  stage:
both  DC  policy  and  DC  design  are  set  before 𝑦 is  known  (and  the
remaining stages, namely 2–6 in Section 3.5, now become Stages 4-8).
With probability 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1], 𝑦 takes the value 𝑦ℎ and the good economic
state of Proposition 1 materializes. With probability (1 − 𝛾), a bad state,
𝑦𝑙, occurs, in which credit risks are profound and there are relatively
many bad borrowers, as in Proposition 2. That is, we let 𝑦ℎ represent
“High 𝑦 ” in Table 1, with 𝑦ℎ > 2 (𝑐 + 𝜏), while 𝑦𝑙 represents “Low 𝑦” in
Table 1 with 𝑦𝑙 ∈

)

𝑐

.

(
𝑐 , 4
3

6.1.  Welfare expression

We  define  aggregate  social  welfare  as  the  sum  of  the  expected
payoffs of all households and the total profits of lenders and the DC
issuer. Welfare is then determined by two factors only. The first is the
value added of the projects that receive funding. From Propositions 1
and 2, in equilibrium households borrow from home lenders, so that a
project’s expected NPV is 𝑞 𝑦 − 𝑐. Some of this value added accrues to
households, through positive net returns on projects, and some of the
value added is captured as profits by the digital payment issuer and
lenders. The second factor is the privacy costs borne by DC users. In
general form, welfare can be expressed as:
(𝑞 𝑦 − 𝑐) 𝑓 ( 𝑞| ‘‘borrowing’’) 𝑑 𝑞

𝑊 = ∫

borrowers

− ∫

DC users

(𝛼 𝜑𝜃) 𝑔 ( 𝜑| ‘‘DC use’’) 𝑑 𝜑

At the policy maker’s decision stage, the state of the economy is
uncertain, and therefore the policy maker’s objective is to maximize
expected welfare, 𝐸 [𝑊 ], with respect to 𝜃:

17 The  DC  issuer  faces  a  similar  problem  under  a  different  data  usage
strategy, where it sells exclusive data access to the highest bidding lender.
The same undifferentiated loan rates ensue at Stage 4 and, foreseeing this at
Stage 2, all households choose cash. The DC issuer then makes zero profit.
18 An example of constraining intrusiveness could be not allowing a BigTech
to pair (all of) its social media or ecommerce data with the collected payment
data.  For  example,  China  has  imposed  regulatory  bounds  on  the  use  of
payment and platform data in BigTech credit provision.

max
𝜃

𝐸 [𝑊 ] = max

Proposition 4. The policy maker’s objective is given by
{𝛾 𝑊ℎ + (1 − 𝛾) 𝑊𝑙
(
[
1 −

𝑦ℎ − 𝑐 − 2𝛼 𝜃

𝑊ℎ =

1 +

)

}

𝜃

]
𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢]

4𝛼
3 (𝑐 + 𝜏)

3
4

𝑊𝑙 =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝜃

𝜃 (𝑦𝑙 −(𝑐+𝜏))2(𝑦𝑙 −𝑐+2𝜏)
6𝛼 𝑦𝑙
(
(𝑦𝑙 −𝑐)(𝑦𝑙 −𝑐−2𝛼)+ 4
𝛼2−𝜏2
3

)

𝑦𝑙

if 𝑦𝑙 < 2𝛼 + 𝑐 + 𝜏
if 𝑦𝑙 > 2𝛼 + 𝑐 + 𝜏

(15)

(16)

(17)

where 𝑊ℎ and 𝑊𝑙 represent welfare in the good and bad states, respectively,
and the closed-form for 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] is in (10).

Proof. See Appendix A.4. ■

6.2.  Socially optimal regulation

In the bad state, welfare increases linearly with 𝜃, as seen from (17).
A higher 𝜃 helps households who want to reveal their types to do so,
while there are no disclosure externalities when the loan market for
unrevealed  households  is  inoperative.  Instead,  in  the  good  state,  all
households receive loans and therefore the total value added of projects
is independent of 𝜃. The DC’s impact on aggregate welfare then runs
through privacy costs. A higher 𝜃 has a direct effect on privacy costs
in (3) and in addition has an indirect effect from disclosure cascades.
These effects are seen from, respectively, the terms 𝜃 and 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢] in
(16). Put together, direct and indirect effects imply that 𝑊ℎ decreases
more than linearly with 𝜃. This nonlinearity creates the potential for an
interior solution for socially optimal policy, derived in Proposition 5.

Proposition 5. When the good state is certain (𝛾 =  1), privacy costs
dominate and the policy maker bans the DC, 𝜃 = 0. When the bad state
is certain (𝛾 = 0), credit inclusion from type differentiation dominates and
the laissez-faire policy, 𝜃 = 1, is socially optimal. When 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1), the policy
maker for some parameterizations chooses to regulate the DC with 𝜃 ∈ (0, 1)
given by

𝜃 =

3
32𝛼2

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

√ (

4𝛼2 + (𝑐 + 𝜏)2 −

(𝑐+𝜏)2−12𝛼2

)(

8𝛼2𝛾(𝛼+𝑐)+3(1−𝛾)𝜆(𝑐+𝜏)2+4𝛼2(2𝛾 𝜏−(1−𝛾)𝜆)

)2

16𝛼4𝛾2+48𝛼3(1−𝛾)𝛾 𝜆+9(1−𝛾)2𝜆2(𝑐+𝜏)2+12𝛼2(1−𝛾)𝜆(4𝛾(𝑐+𝜏)−(1−𝛾)𝜆)

where

𝜆 ≡

(

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

(𝑦𝑙 −(𝑐+𝜏))2(𝑦𝑙 −𝑐+2𝜏)
6𝛼 𝑦𝑙

(𝑦𝑙 −𝑐)(𝑦𝑙 −𝑐−2𝛼)+ 4
3

𝛼2−𝜏2

𝑦𝑙

)

if 𝑦𝑙 < 2𝛼 + 𝑐 + 𝜏
if 𝑦𝑙 > 2𝛼 + 𝑐 + 𝜏

Proof. See Appendix A.5. ■

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
(18)

(19)

6.3.  Distributional effects

(14)

The distributional effects from DC design differ between the two
states of 𝑦. In the bad state, DC users’ disclosure is a Pareto improve-
ment, creating value to them, no externalities to others, and profits to
the DC issuer. In the good state, some (high 𝑞, low 𝜑) households gain
from a higher 𝜃 through lower customized loan rates. But their gains
are exactly offset by the losses of unrevealed households, who face a
higher loan rate.19 Moreover, although with a higher 𝜃 the DC issuer
gains fee revenues at lenders’ expense, the sum of DC issuer and lender
profits is unchanged. The impact of 𝜃 on 𝑊ℎ therefore derives from the

19 In  practice,  such  distributional  effects  could  materialize  along  socially
undesirable dimensions, such as race or gender  (Fuster et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023) .

8 

I. Agur et al.

one effect that has no offset: the privacy loss of households that are
swept along in disclosure cascades.

7.  Model extensions

This section considers four extensions to the baseline model. The
mathematical derivations for two of these extensions are contained in
the Online Appendix.20

7.1.  A second policy instrument

Household data disclosure depends on two margins in our model:
who  sorts  into  DC  use,  which  we  refer  to  as  the  extensive  margin
of disclosure; and how much information is disclosed about DC-using
households, which we term the intensive margin. By constraining the
intensive margin, regulation also affects sorting into means of payment
and  thereby  the  extensive  margin.  But  the  fact  that  there  are  two
margins  implies  room  for  a  second  instrument  to  improve  welfare
outcomes.

We explore such an instrument in the form of a government tax
or subsidy on DC use (e.g., on DC transactions or on opening a user
wallet), denoted by 𝑇 , where 𝑇  > 0 represents a tax and 𝑇  < 0 is a
subsidy.21 We rederive the model with the inclusion of 𝑇 in Appendix
B.1 and find that for some parameterizations the availability of a second
instrument does not raise welfare (e.g., when banning DC is optimal),
while for other parameterizations it does. The most surprising outcome
is that subsidizing DC use is sometimes socially optimal. A subsidy can
optimally lean against underdisclosure, which occurs in the bad state
because lender market power establishes loan rates above 𝑐 and some
positive NPV households choose cash.

7.2.  Alternative sources of credit quality

In the baseline model, the DC is the sole source of credit quality
information. While adding lender-specific household data lies outside
the scope of the current analysis, we can incorporate alternative public
sources of information. Appendix B.2 considers two possibilities. The
first  is  pre-existing  public  information  on  borrowers,  such  as  from
credit registries or FICO scores. The second is public payment system
data, such as from a data-sharing CBDC, where we assume that the
privately-issued DC is more informationally intrusive than the public
alternative. Appendix B.2 finds that both possibilities lead back to our
baseline results, because sorting conditions between means of payment
are unchanged. The key factor for our results is that the DC is more
informationally intrusive than other payment alternatives, not that it is
the sole source of credit quality data.

7.3.  Lender consortium

This extension lets a consortium of lenders (as in, e.g., Allen and
Gale (1999) and Liberti et al. (2022)) own the DC and choose 𝜃. We as-
sume that the collected DC data are now freely available to all lenders.
While lenders cooperate in DC design, their mode of competition on
the credit market is the same as in the baseline. In the good state, a

20 Appendices  B.1  and  B.2  contain  the  derivations  behind  the  extensions
in, respectively, Sections 7.1 and 7.2. In addition, Appendix B.3 covers the
“Intermediate 𝑦” case of Table 1; and Appendix B.4 considers an additional
extension where 𝑞 and 𝜑 are correlated.
21 Implicit here is that reduced (increased) DC-based consumption from tax-
ation (subsidization) does not affect the DC issuer’s ability to infer household
creditworthiness.  Note  that 𝑇  < 0 can  also  be  interpreted  as  a  term  that
represents an ease-of-transactions benefit of DC relative to cash (as discussed
in Section 3.3.1).

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

lender’s total equilibrium profit is 𝜏.22 Therefore, lenders’ profits do not
depend on 𝜃 and the lender consortium is indifferent about 𝜃 in this
case: privately optimal 𝜃 is now indeterminate. Unlike the DC issuer,
the lender consortium does not actively exploit disclosure externalities;
unlike  a  social  planner,  the  consortium  does  not  lean  against  such
externalities either. Instead, in the bad state, only revealed households
receive credit and the mass of such households rises as 𝜃 increases, as
seen from (13), so that the consortium sets 𝜃 =  1. In the bad state,
𝜃 = 1 creates value for households and lenders, and is optimal for the
DC issuer, lender consortium and social planner alike.

7.4.  User base and inference quality

The DC issuer’s inference quality could depend on the size of its user
base, as screening algorithms can become more effective when trained
on a larger group of borrowers  (Ghosh et al., 2025). We here write the
probability of type revelation as a function 𝑝 (𝜃 , 𝜇 (𝜃)) where 𝜇 (𝜃) is the
mass of DC users and 𝑝 rises both as 𝜃 increases and as 𝜇 (𝜃) increases.
Due  to  disclosure  cascades, 𝜇′ (𝜃) > 0 (Section 4.1)  and  therefore
𝑑 𝑝(𝜃 ,𝜇(𝜃))
𝜇′ (𝜃) > 0. If we normalize 𝑝 (1, 𝜇 (1)) = 1
𝑑 𝜃
(i.e., with the largest attainable mass of DC users, which occurs at 𝜃 = 1,
the inference technology works perfectly), then equilibrium expressions
are  identical  to  our  baseline.  With 𝜃 =  1,  the  DC  issuer  now  plays
on both households’ disclosure externality and the network effect that
improves its inference technology.

= 𝜕 𝑝(𝜃 ,𝜇(𝜃))
𝜕 𝜃

+ 𝜕 𝑝(𝜃 ,𝜇(𝜃))
𝜕 𝜇(𝜃)

8.  Conclusion

New technologies are fundamentally changing the way that pay-
ments  and  lending  take  place,  and  create  an  unprecedented  scope
for  data  monopolization.  Such  developments  can  bring  both  unique
opportunities and risks to consumers and borrowers, and policy institu-
tions are actively grappling with the extent to which regulation should
step  in.  This  paper  analyzes  how  private  and  social  optima  diverge
when a monopolist offers privacy-valuing households a digital payment
system  that  collects  data  on  their  habits  and  can  help  them  signal
their creditworthiness to lenders. We find that the monopolist uses its
position to play off both households and lenders against each other.
To maximize the value of its household data, the monopolist makes
its data collection as intrusive as possible. This squeezes households
into a partially unraveling Market for Lemons, whereby the willingness
of some high quality households to disclose prods more tranches of
households to use the digital payment instrument.

Socially optimal data regulation aims at shielding households from
being played off against each other. The challenge in doing so, is that
regulation is a long-term policy, while the benefits from counteracting
intrusive  data  collection  are  state  dependent.  In  a  bad  state,  where
projects become less profitable, credit provision to unrevealed borrow-
ers can freeze. Data gathering can then be positive for aggregate welfare
because the data unfreeze part of the credit market by differentiating
better quality households. Socially optimal regulation trades off this
improved credit supply during downturns against the privacy losses of
households from disclosure cascades in upturns.

Future work can build on the framework provided here to consider
competition between multiple payment providers, which could include
a public provider, such as a CBDC. Notably, our framework can already
be  interpreted  from  the  angle  of  a  benchmark  case  wherein  CBDC
is  introduced  with  data-sharing  features  as  the  only  alternative  to
cash. What we discussed as optimal regulation (𝜃) of a private digital
payment system, can equivalently be considered the optimal degree of
data collection with a welfare-maximizing CBDC.

22 Namely,  a  mass 1 of  on-island  borrowers,  which  have  expected  profit
( 𝑐+𝜏
− 𝑐 = 𝜏 per
𝑞

− 𝑐 = 𝜏 per  revealed  borrower  and 𝐸 [ 𝑞| 𝑢]

)

)

( 𝑐+𝜏
𝐸[ 𝑞|𝑢]

𝑞
unrevealed borrower.

I. Agur et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

Future work can also extend this framework to encompass elements
of household data ownership. Policies that allow households to transfer
their payment data across lenders have been implemented in various
countries, and the implications of such open banking policies for credit
market outcomes are a subject of active study  (Babina et al., 2025;
Brunnermeier  and  Payne, 2024; He  et  al., 2023; Nam, 2022; Alok
et al., 2024).  Moreover, the EU and California have recently imple-
mented  regulation  that  endows  households  with  a  degree  of  digital
data ownership, including the ability to opt out of the sharing of their
data. Doerr et al. (2023) study how California’s Consumer Privacy Act
has affected credit market outcomes, particularly for FinTechs that rely
on the purchase of such data.

In our model, the monopolist’s ability to profitably sell data about
households’ creditworthiness partly stems from the adverse selection
suffered by a lender that would choose not to purchase this information.
In a setting that would incorporate costs to collecting and processing
payment data, policies that allow households to credibly transmit their
payment data to lenders would reduce the incentives to collect their
data in the first place. Data ownership policies could then complement
or replace intrusive regulation directed at the design of the payment
technology. We leave a formal analysis of this issue to future research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Itai  Agur: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,
Methodology,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization. Anil  Ari: Writing
–  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Methodology,  Formal
analysis, Conceptualization. Giovanni Dell’Ariccia: Writing – review
&  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis,
Conceptualization.

Funding sources

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agen-

cies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104019.

Data availability

Mathematica file for ‘‘Bank Competition and Household Privacy in a D
igital Payment Monopoly’’ (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Acemoglu, D., Makhdoumi, A., Malekian, A., Ozdaglar, A., 2022. Too much data: Prices
and inefficiencies in data markets. Am. Econ. J.: Microecon. 14 (4), 218–256, URL
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/mic.20200200.

Agarwal, S., Hauswald, R., 2010. Distance and private information in lending. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 23 (7), 2757–2788. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhq001.

Agur, I., Ari, A., Dell’Ariccia, G., 2022. Designing central bank digital currencies. J.
Monet. Econ. 125, 62–79, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0304393221000520.

Ahnert,  T.,  Hoffmann,  P.,  Monnet,  C.,  2022.  Payments  and  Privacy  in  the  Digital
Economy. ECB Working Papers 2662, European Central Bank, URL https://www.
ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecb.wp2662~fa8429a967.en.pdf.

Allen, F., Gale, D., 1999. Diversity of opinion and financing of new technologies. J.
Financ. Intermediation 8 (1), 68–89, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1042957399902619.

Alok, S., Ghosh, P., Kulkarni, N., Puri, M., 2024. Open Banking and Digital Payments:
Implications for Credit Access. NBER Working Papers 33259, National Bureau of
Economic Research, URL https://www.nber.org/papers/w33259.

Armantier, O., Doerr, S., Frost, J., Fuster, A., Shue, K., 2021. Whom Do Consumers
Trust With Their Data? US Survey Evidence. BIS Bulletin 42, Bank for International
Settlements, URL https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull42.htm.

Armantier, O., Doerr, S., Frost, J., Fuster, A., Shue, K., 2024. Nothing to Hide? Gender
and Age Differences in Willingness to Share Data. BIS Working Papers 1187, Bank
for International Settlements, URL https://www.bis.org/publ/work1187.htm.
Babina, T., Bahaj, S., Buchak, G., De Marco, F., Foulis, A., Gornall, W., Mazzola, F.,
Yu, T., 2025. Customer data access and fintech entry: Early evidence from open
banking. J. Financ. Econ. forthcoming.

Beck,  T.,  Gambacorta,  L.,  Huang,  Y.,  Li,  Z.,  Qiu,  H.,  2022.  Big  Techs,  QR  Code
Payments and Financial Inclusion. BIS Working Papers 1011, Bank for International
Settlements, URL https://www.bis.org/publ/work1011.htm.

Berg, T., Fuster, A., Puri, M., 2022. FinTech lending. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 14 (1),

187–207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-financial-101521-112042.

Bergemann, D., Bonatti, A., 2024. Data, competition, and digital platforms. Am. Econ.
Rev. 114 (8), 2553–2595, URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.
20230478.

Bergemann,  D.,  Bonatti,  A.,  Gan,  T.,  2022.  The  economics  of  social  data.  Rand
J. Econ. 53 (2), 263–296, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/
1756-2171.12407.

Bian, W., Cong, L.W., Ji, Y., 2024. The Rise of E-Wallet Super-Apps and Buy-Now-Pay-
Later. NBER Working Paper Series 33178, National Bureau of Economic Research,
URL https://www.nber.org/papers/w33178.

Bian, B., Ma, X., Tang, H., 2023. The Supply and Demand for Data Privacy: Evidence
from  Mobile  Apps.  SSRN  Working  Papers,  URL https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=3987541.

Borgonovo, E., Caselli, S., Cillo, A., Masciandaro, D., Rabitti, G., 2021. Money, privacy,
anonymity: What do experiments tell us? J. Financ. Stab. 56, 100934, URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1572308921000930.

Bouvard, M., Casamatta, C., Xiong, R., 2022. Lending and Monitoring: Big Tech vs
Banks.  TSE  Working  Papers  1386,  Toulouse  School  of  Economics,  URL https:
//www.tse-fr.eu/publications/lending-and-monitoring-big-tech-vs-banks.

Brits,  H.,  Jonker,  N.,  2023.  The  Use  of  Financial  Apps:  Privacy  Paradox  or
Privacy  Calculus?  DNB  Working  Papers  794,  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  URL
https://www.dnb.nl/en/publications/research-publications/working-paper-
2023/794-the-use-of-financial-apps-privacy-paradox-or-privacy-calculus/.

Brunnermeier,  M.K.,  Payne,  J.,  2023.  Strategic  Money  and  Credit  Ledgers.  NBER
Working Papers 31561, National Bureau of Economic Research, URL https://www.
nber.org/papers/w31561.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Payne, J., 2024. FinTech Lending, Banking, and Information Porta-
bility. Working Paper, Princeton University, URL https://markus.scholar.princeton.
edu/sites/g/files/toruqf2651/files/documents/FinTech_Banking.pdf.

Budak,  J.,  Rajh,  E.,  Škrinjarić,  B.,  2023.  Resilience  to  online  privacy  violation:
Developing a typology of consumers. Sci. Ann. Econ. Bus. 70 (3), 379–398, URL
https://saeb.feaa.uaic.ro/index.php/saeb/article/view/1737.

Chen, S., Doerr, S., Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Shin, H.S., 2023. The fintech gender
gap. J. Financ. Intermediation 54, 101026, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1042957323000098.

Chen, L., Huang, Y., Ouyang, S., Xiong, W., 2021. The Data Privacy Paradox and Digital
Demand. NBER Working Papers 28854, National Bureau of Economic Research, URL
https://www.nber.org/papers/w28854.

Choi,  S.,  Kim,  B.,  Kim,  Y.-S.,  Kwon,  O.,  2023.  Central  Bank  Digital  Currency  and
Privacy: A Randomized Survey Experiment. BIS Working Papers 1147, Bank for
International Settlements, URL https://www.bis.org/publ/work1147.htm.

Collis,  A.,  Moehring,  A.,  Sen,  A.,  Acquisti,  A.,  2024.  Information  Frictions  and
Heterogeneity in Valuations of Personal Data. SSRN Working Papers, URL https:
//papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3974826.

Cong, L.W., Mayer, S., 2023. Data Union and Regulation in a Data Economy. NBER
Working Papers 30881, National Bureau of Economic Research, URL https://www.
nber.org/papers/w30881.

Cunliffe,  J.,  2023.  Money  and  payments:  A  black  ships  moment?  Speech  delivered
at the Economics of Payments XII Conference at the Federal Reserve Board on
Oct. 26, 2023. URL https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2023/october/jon-
cunliffe-speech-at-the-economics-of-payments-xii-conference.

Cupak, A., Gertler, P., Hajdiak, D., Klacso, J., Rychtárik, S., 2024. Survey of Potential
Users  of  the  Digital  Euro:  New  Evidence  from  Slovakia.  NBS  Occasional  Paper
2/2024, National Bank of Slovakia, URL https://nbs.sk/dokument/83315e7e-3523-
49e6-a4dc-46b91dcbcdd0/stiahnut/?force=false.

Dell’Ariccia, G., Friedman, E., Marquez, R., 1999. Adverse selection as a barrier to
entry in the banking industry. Rand J. Econ. 30 (3), 515–534, URL http://www.
jstor.org/stable/2556061.

Dell’Ariccia, G., Marquez, R., 2004. Information and bank credit allocation. J. Financ.
Econ.  72  (1),  185–214,  URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0304405X03002101.

10 

Jovanovic, B., 1982. Truthful disclosure of information. Bell J. Econ. 13 (1), 36–44,

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104019 

URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/3003428.

Kahn,  C.M.,  van  Oordt,  M.R.,  2023.  The  Demand  for  Programmable  Payments.
SSRN Working Papers, URL https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=
4218966.

Li, J., 2023. Predicting the demand for central bank digital currency: A structural anal-
ysis with survey data. J. Monet. Econ. 134, 73–85, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0304393222001398.

Li, J., Pegoraro, S., 2023. Borrowing from a Bigtech Platform. SSRN Working Papers,

URL https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4206016.

Liberti,  J.,  Sturgess,  J.,  Sutherland,  A.,  2022.  How  voluntary  information  shar-
ing  systems  form:  Evidence  from  a  U.S.  commercial  credit  bureau.  J.  Financ.
Econ. 145 (3), 827–849, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0304405X21004086.

Lin, T., 2022. Valuing intrinsic and instrumental preferences for privacy. Mark. Sci. 41

(4), 60–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2022.1368.

Lin, T., Strulov-Shlain, A., 2023. Choice architecture, privacy valuations, and selection
bias in consumer data. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM Conference. Association
for Computing Machinery, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3580507.3597674.

Liu, E., Ma, S., Veldkamp, L., 2025. Data sales and data dilution. J. Financ. Econ.

forthcoming.

Nam, R.J., 2022. Open Banking and Customer Data Sharing: Implications for Fintech
Borrowers. SAFE Working Papers 364, Leibniz Institute for Financial Research, URL
https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/266685/1/1824505523.pdf.

Ouyang, S., 2022. Cashless Payment and Financial Inclusion. SSRN Working Papers,

URL https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3948925.

Parlour, C.A., Rajan, U., Zhu, H., 2022. When FinTech competes for payment flows.
Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4985–5024. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhac022.
Petersen, M.A., Rajan, R.G., 1995. The effect of credit market competition on lending
relationships. Q. J. Econ. 110 (2), 407–443. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2118445.
Prince, J.T., Wallsten, S., 2022. How much is privacy worth around the world and
across platforms? J. Econ. Manag. Strat. 31 (4), 841–861, URL https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jems.12481.

Sharpe,  S.A.,  1990.  Asymmetric  information,  bank  lending,  and  implicit  contracts:
A stylized model of customer relationships. J. Financ. 45 (4), 1069–1087, URL
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1990.tb02427.x.
Tan,  B.J.,  2024.  Central  bank  digital  currency  and  financial  inclusion.  J.
Macroecon.  81,  103620,  URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0164070424000351.

Tang, H., 2023. The value of privacy: Evidence from online borrowers. Mimeo, URL
https://drive.google.com/file/d/11Cotr0FQnGIW4FsZq4lk0ouhQHq7W22y/view.
Tinn,  K.,  2024.  A  Theory  Model  of  Digital  Currency  with  Asymmetric  Privacy.
SSRN Working Papers, URL https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=
4891933.

Vives,  X.,  Ye,  Z.,  2025.  Information  technology  and  lender  competition.  J.  Fi-
nanc. Econ. 163, 103957, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0304405X24001806.

I. Agur et al.

Doerr,  S.,  Frost,  J.,  Gambacorta,  L.,  Shreeti,  V.,  2025.  Big  techs  in  finance.
In:  Oxford  Handbook  of  Banking,  fourth  ed.  Oxford  University  Press,  URL
https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-oxford-handbook-of-banking-
9780198897071?lang=en&cc=gb#.

Doerr, S., Gambacorta, L., Guiso, L., del Villar, M.S., 2023. Privacy Regulation and
Fintech  Lending.  BIS  Working  Papers  1088,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,
URL https://www.bis.org/publ/work1103.pdf.

Dong, Y., Hu, J., Huang, Y., Qiu, H., Zhang, Y., 2025. The Use and Disuse of FinTech
Credit: When Buy-Now-Pay-Later Meets Credit Reporting. BIS Working Papers 1239,
Bank for International Settlements, URL https://www.bis.org/publ/work1239.pdf.
ECB, 2021. Eurosystem Report on the Public Consultation on a Digital Euro. Tech.
Rep.,  European  Central  Bank,  URL https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/
Eurosystem_report_on_the_public_consultation_on_a_digital_euro~539fa8cd8d.en.pdf.
Engels,  C.,  Francis,  B.B.,  Philip,  D.,  2022.  The  Cost  of  Privacy  Failures:  Evidence
from Bank Depositors’ Reactions to Breaches. SSRN Working Papers, URL https:
//papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3625668.

Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Huang, Y., Shin, H.S., Zbinden, P., 2020. BigTech and the
changing structure of financial intermediation. Econ. Policy 34 (100), 761–799.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/epolic/eiaa003.

Fuster,  A.,  Goldsmith-Pinkham,  P.,  Ramadorai,  T.,  Walther,  A.,  2022.  Predictably
unequal? The effects of machine learning on credit markets. J. Financ. 77 (1),
5–47, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jofi.13090.

Gambacorta,  L.,  Khalil,  F.,  Parigi,  B.M.,  2022.  Big  Techs  vs  Banks.  BIS  Working
Papers 1037, Bank for International Settlements, URL https://www.bis.org/publ/
work1037.htm.

Garratt,  R.,  Lee,  M.J.,  2021.  Monetizing  Privacy.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New
York Staff Reports 958, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, URL https://www.
newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr958.html.

Garratt, R.J., Van Oordt, M.R., 2021. Privacy as a public good: A case for electronic
cash. J. Political Econ. 129 (7), 2157–2180, URL https://www.journals.uchicago.
edu/doi/abs/10.1086/714133?journalCode=jpe.

Ghosh, P., Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2025. Fintech lending and cashless payments. J. Financ.

forthcoming.

Goldfarb,  A.,  Que,  V.F.,  2023.  The  economics  of  digital  privacy.  Annu.  Rev.  Econ.
15 (1), 267–286, URL https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.1146/
annurev-economics-082322-014346.

Goldfarb, A., Tucker, C., 2012. Shifts in privacy concerns. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (3),
349–353, URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.102.3.349.
Grossman, S.J., Hart, O.D., 1980. Disclosure laws and takeover bids. J. Financ. 35 (2),

323–334, URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2327390.

He, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2023. Open banking: Credit market competition when
borrowers own the data. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 449–474. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jfineco.2022.12.003.

Heitz, A.R., Martin, C., Ufier, A., 2023. Bank loan monitoring, distance, and delegation.
AEA Pap. Proc. 113, 177–181, URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/
pandp.20231118.

Huang, J., 2021. Fintech Expansion. SSRN Working Papers, URL https://papers.ssrn.

com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3957688.

Jiang,  E.X.,  Yu,  G.Y.,  Zhang,  J.,  2023.  Bank  Competition  amid  Digital  Disruption:
Implications for Financial Inclusion. SSRN Working Papers, URL https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4178420.

11 

