Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Central Bank–Driven Mispricing✩
Loriana Pelizzon a, Marti G. Subrahmanyam b, Davide Tomio c,∗
a Goethe University Frankfurt & Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3, 60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
b Leonard N. Stern School of Business & NYU Shanghai, New York University, 44 West Fourth Street, New York, NY 10012, USA
c Darden School of Business, University of Virginia, 100 Darden Boulevard, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We explore whether Quantitative Easing (QE) negatively affected the functioning of the treasury market.
Focusing on the arbitrage between European sovereign bonds and their futures contracts, we show that the
scarcity of treasuries created by QE led to a disconnect between the prices of identical assets. We identify three
channels: reduced bond market liquidity, increased funding costs in the repo market, and a higher cost of carry.
A change in a policy instrument allows us to identify scarcity as the main driver and rule out alternatives,
such as balance sheet costs. Our results extend to other arbitrage relations involving treasuries.

Dataset link: Replication Code for Central Bank
Driven Mispricing (Original data)

JEL classification:
G01
G12
G14

Keywords:
Central Bank interventions
Price discovery
Sovereign bonds
Futures contracts
Arbitrage

1.  Introduction

Following  the  Great  Recession,  central  banks  engaged  in  Quan-
titative  Easing  (QE),  mainly  through  large-scale  purchases  of  gov-
ernment  debt.  These  interventions  were  effective  in  lowering  trea-
sury yields (D’Amico et al., 2012; D’Amico and King, 2013; Song and
Zhu, 2018), operating through, among others, the channel of scarcity:
As  QE  reduces  the  supply  of  treasuries,  their  prices  increase,  since
investors  have  investment  needs  that  can  only  be  satisfied  by  safe
assets (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2013).

Policy  makers  have  hypothesized  a  possible  tension  inherent  to
a  central  bank’s  decision  to  engage  in  QE  (Bernanke, 2012; Cœuré,
2015):  The  reduction  in  treasury  yields  may  come  at  the  cost  of  a

deterioration  in  market  functioning  and  a  suppression  of  the  price
discovery  mechanism.  The  goal  of  much  of  the  previous  literature
has been to show the effect of QE on asset prices. In this paper, we
provide the first empirical evidence that the scarcity that followed the
QE purchases by the European Central Bank (ECB) negatively affected
the  quality  of  the  market  for  treasuries.  Specifically,  we  show  that
QE impeded the arbitrage mechanism: Scarcity limited the ability of
arbitrageurs to ensure that prices across markets for interest rates were
closely aligned by increasing the transaction, funding, and carry costs
they face.

We obtain our results in three steps. We focus our analysis on a
textbook example of arbitrage — that between cash treasuries and their

✩
Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We are grateful to the editor and an anonymous referee for their invaluable feedback. We thank the Einaudi
Institute of Economics and Finance, the NYU Stern Center for Global Economy and Business, the NYU-Salomon Center, the Volkswagen Stiftung Europe and Global
Challenges Project, and the SAFE Center, funded by the State of Hessen Initiative for Research, LOEWE, for their financial support. Subrahmanyam also thanks
the Anneliese Maier Research Award of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for generous support and the London Business School for its hospitality. We
thank the market participants, Treasury officials, and central bankers we met for sharing their understanding of the institutional details of the sovereign Euro-zone
bond market. We are also indebted to Nina Boyarchenko, Stefania D’Amico, Wenxin Du, Darrell Duffie, Marco Fanari, Peter Feldhütter, Kenneth Garbade, Virginia
Gianinazzi, Kinda Hachem, Sven Klingler, Stefano Iacobelli, Francis Longstaff, Marco Macchiavelli, Narayan Naik, Christopher Neely, Benoît Nguyen, Guillaume
Nolin, Paolo Pasquariello, Anna Pavlova, Angelo Ranaldo, Lucio Sarno, Stephen Schaefer, Zhaogang Song, Jeremy Stein, Miklos Vari, Roberto Violi, Haoxiang Zhu
and participants in seminars at the London Business School, the Cass Business School, the Einaudi Institute, the Bank of Italy, the Office of Financial Research,
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, the SFS Cavalcade Conference, and the Fifth International Conference on Sovereign Bond Markets for helpful
comments. We thank Satchit Sagade for research support.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: pelizzon@safe.uni-frankfurt.de (L. Pelizzon), msubrahm@stern.nyu.edu (M.G. Subrahmanyam), tomiod@darden.virginia.edu (D. Tomio).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104004
Received 10 July 2022; Received in revised form 7 January 2025; Accepted 8 January 2025

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)104004Availableonline30January20250304-405X/©2025TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 1. Central Bank Holdings of Sovereign Bonds and the Futures-Bond Arbitrage: This figure shows the time series of sovereign bonds holdings by the ECB as a fraction of their
outstanding amount and measures of the deviation between prices of bonds and futures. Panels A and B show 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, the annualized return from buying a futures and shorting
the CTD bond, in the absence of trading and funding costs, at a daily frequency. Panels C and D show the daily 1-min return correlation between futures contracts and deliverable
bonds, 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡. The dashed line represents the amount of bonds held at the ECB as a fraction of the total amount of bonds outstanding (on the right axes). Data on bond purchases
are obtained from the ECB and data on the amount of bond outstanding are obtained from the National Central Banks. Data on bond prices and characteristics are obtained from
MTS, data on repo transactions are obtained from MTS and BrokerTec, and futures data are obtained for the Eurex market via Thomson Reuters. The dashed vertical line marks
the implementation of the cash-collateralized securities lending facility.

futures contracts — and measure impediments to the arbitrage mech-
anism  in  two  ways,  using  return  correlations  and  price  differential.
We calculate these quantities for the most liquid, long-term futures on
German and Italian debt. We plot these measures for varying levels of
bond holdings by the ECB in Fig. 1, which gives a preview of our first
set of findings.

First, we find a positive association between increased ECB bond
holdings and impediments to price discovery: As central banks holdings
grew from 0% to 15% of the outstanding amount, the return correlation
between assets with virtually identical cash flows decreased from 99%
to 94% (95% to 81%) for Germany (Italy), a decrease of seven (eight)
pre-QE standard deviations, indicating a significant divergence between
bonds and futures prices. This decrease in correlation hinders market
participants’ ability to hedge. For example, the one-day 5%-expected
shortfall  of  a e1  million  bond  portfolio  that  is  fully  hedged  with  a
futures contract would have increased by 145%, from e567 to e1389
(95%, from e1268 to e2472). Similarly, the price differential between
futures and bonds increased from 0% for both countries to 1.8% and
1.5% for Germany and Italy, respectively.

Second, we show that the disconnect between bonds and futures
is a consequence of the central bank’s impact on three costs faced by
arbitrageurs:  (i)  transaction  costs,  (ii)  security  borrowing  costs,  and
(iii) the cost of carry. Using the bond’s bid–ask spread as a measure
of  illiquidity,  we  show  that  a  10%  increase  in  the  stock  of  bonds
held by the ECB increased the bid–ask spread by e1.6 cents, a 25%
increase  over  the  pre-QE  average  bid–ask  spread.  We  measure  the
cost of borrowing a bond by its repo ‘‘specialness’’, that is, by how
large an interest rate a cash lender is willing to forego to borrow a
specific asset, and show that a 10% increase in ECB’s bonds holdings
increased specialness by 28 bp, a five-fold increase over the before-QE
specialness of 5 bp. Finally, we show that the slope of the term structure
of specialness and repo volatility, which capture the costs of carry of
an arbitrage transaction, increased significantly as a consequence of QE.
These costs positively predict the disconnect between bond and futures
prices, explaining 54%–65% of its variation.

Third, we demonstrate that our results are driven by scarcity using
an exogenous shock based on a policy change. A natural alternative
hypothesis is that dealers’ balance sheet constraints affected the cost
for the trade we consider, similar to what Fleckenstein and Longstaff
(2020) and Du et al. (2018) show for the US futures-bond basis and cov-
ered interest rate parity, respectively. Using a balance sheet usage costs

measure, based on unsecured-loan turn-of-the-year premium (Flecken-
stein and Longstaff, 2020), we find that, while balance sheet constraints
may have contributed, they were not the main driver of the mispricing
dynamics we observe.

We  identify  scarcity  as  the  principal  channel  by  considering  the
implementation in 2016 of a cash-collateralized securities lending fa-
cility (CCSLF), whereby the ECB reduced asset scarcity by lending out
its bond holdings against cash (Arrata et al., 2020; Roh, 2022). We
show that the CCSLF resulted in an easing of the limits to arbitrage and
an improvement in the functioning of treasury markets. Prior security
lending efforts by national central banks were asset-collateralized and,
thus, did not increase the aggregate supply of securities available for
lending.

In our main analyses, we focus on the arbitrage mechanism between
cash treasuries and their futures contracts. This is an ideal setting: the
two  legs  of  the  trade  are  almost  perfectly  offsetting,  and  allow  the
trader to be fully hedged with a single transaction; the trades rely on
firm quotes and are centrally cleared, leading to minimal execution-
and  counterparty-risk;  the  pricing  relationship  is  a  textbook  case  of
arbitrage, which is obtained under minimal assumptions.

The QE-driven frictions we document, however, are common to any
arbitrage trade that involves shorting cash sovereign bonds, not just
that  between  bonds  and  futures.  We  show  that  our  findings  extend
to term structure arbitrage trades, using deviations from a fitted yield
curve (Hu et al., 2013), and the swap spread (Klingler and Sundaresan,
2019). As a counterfactual, we show that arbitrage trades only involv-
ing treasury derivatives (futures option put–call parity), which were not
made scarce by QE, do not display signs of impediments to arbitrage.
The  inefficiencies  we  document  are  a  prime  concern  for  central
bankers, as the implementation of the CCSLF suggests. The ECB states
that its QE operations must obey ‘‘the concept of market-neutrality[,
that is,] while we do want to affect prices, we do not want to suppress
the price discovery mechanism’’ (Cœuré, 2015). Similarly, the Federal
Reserve System listed impairments to market liquidity and price discov-
ery as a cost of continuing its Large-scale Asset Purchases (Bernanke,
2012).  Our  finding  that  QE  impaired  price  discovery,  but  that  the
CCSLF improved market quality provides a guide on how to effectively
implement QE, modulating scarcity to affect yields while maintaining
market functioning.

It is in the policy makers’ interest to ensure that market participants
agree  on  the  correct  interest  rate  level,  and  also  for  the  market  for

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040042L. Pelizzon et al.

interest  rates  to  be  informative.  Disagreement  on  monetary  policy
affects investment and consumption (Baker et al., 2016; Ehling et al.,
2018). For market participants, uncertainty on the shape of the term
structure translates into increased capital at risk, as the e10 trillion
outstanding Euro-zone sovereign bonds are widely used as collateral.
Finally, a divergence between interest rates and instruments designed
to replicate them hurts market participants’ ability to effectively hedge
their  interest  rate  exposure  and  indicates  that  monetary  policy  may
be inefficiently transmitted across fixed income markets (Ballensiefen
et al., 2023; Eisenschmidt et al., 2023).

The initial implementation of the CCSLF demonstrates that central
banks  already  possess  an  effective  tool  to  alleviate  the  impairment
of market functioning that accompanies asset scarcity resulting from
QE. Our empirical results point to a clear policy recommendation in
this direction: the ECB should adjust the supply of safe assets it lends
against  cash  to  improve  market  functioning  as  and  when  the  need
arises. This adjustment can be achieved by increasing the overall and
institution-specific security borrowing limits and/or by calibrating the
pricing of its facilities. Thus, we propose that central banks consider
their securities lending facilities as a second lever in their QE toolbox,
aiming to contain the market-quality consequences that arise from the
other lever, the outright purchases of bonds.

We describe the details of the ECB’s QE intervention and the data
sources we employ in Section 2. Section 3 presents the arbitrage trade
we focus on, and shows that it is not profitable, prior to the QE. In
Section 4, we show the effect that the QE had on the pricing relation
between  cash  treasury  and  futures  contracts  and  on  the  frictions  to
arbitrage in fixed-income markets. In Section 5 we use a policy-based
shock and counterfactuals to show that scarcity drives our results. We
present extensions of our analysis in Section 6 and a general discussion
of our results in Section 7. We conclude in Section 8.

Literature review

The  effect  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  interventions  on
the price of targeted assets has been extensively investigated, in the
context of the purchases by the Federal Reserve (Gagnon et al., 2011;
Krishnamurthy  and  Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011; D’Amico  et  al., 2012;
D’Amico  and  King, 2013; Bauer  and  Rudebusch, 2014; Song  and
Zhu, 2018), the ECB (Eser and Schwaab, 2016; Ghysels et al., 2016;
Krishnamurthy  et  al., 2017; Koijen  et  al., 2021),  and  the  Bank  of
England (Joyce et al., 2011; Christensen and Rudebusch, 2012).1

A  new  strand  in  the  literature  has  focused  on  how  QE  affects
treasury market liquidity (Pelizzon et al., 2016; De Pooter et al., 2018;
Kandrac, 2018; Schlepper et al., 2020; Christensen and Gillan, 2022),
and, most recently, the pricing of repo transactions (D’Amico et al.,
2018; Arrata et al., 2020; Corradin and Maddaloni, 2020; Roh, 2022).
We  contribute  to  the  literature  by  showing  that  these  unintended
consequences of QE impede the arbitrage mechanism at play in treasury
markets, as they increase costs faced by arbitrageurs. We show that
scarcity, one of the channels by which QE affects bond prices (D’Amico
et al., 2012), can thus impede the pass-through of monetary policy from
treasuries to other assets linked to them by arbitrage.

Pasquariello (2018)  shows  that  government  interventions  in  the
foreign exchange market drive a wedge between American Depository
Receipts and foreign stocks. We focus on the bond market, the direct
object of the QE intervention and policy transmission.

Extensive recent work (Du et al., 2018, 2023; Anderson et al., 2021;
Cenedese et al., 2021) has sought to establish the impact of regula-
tory  (Boyarchenko  et  al., 2018)  and  balance  sheet  costs  on  pricing
relations, primarily the covered interest rate parity. In the context of
the futures-bond trade that we also consider, Fleckenstein and Longstaff

(2020) show that the difference between observed and implied repo
rates is a function of intermediaries’ balance sheet costs. We contribute
to this literature by proposing another threat to market functioning,
that  is  the  asset  scarcity  that  follows  central  banks’  unconventional
monetary policies. While balance sheet costs certainly play a role, we
show that they cannot explain the dynamics we observe, based on a
measure developed by Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020) and a policy
change. To the extent that scarcity may drive balance sheet usage, our
findings shed light on the determinants of these costs.

Our paper is related to the literature on the effects of institutional
investors’ demand on relative asset prices. Hazelkorn et al. (2022) con-
sider the effect of futures investors on futures-spot bases and Klingler
and Sundaresan (2019) the impact on pensions’ demand on the swap
spread. We show the impact of the ultimate price-insensitive institu-
tional investor, a central bank, on the relative price of bonds. Lastly,
we show its effect on the difference between derivatives-implied and
observed risk-free rates (Fleckenstein and Longstaff, 2020; Van Bins-
bergen et al., 2022).

2.  Institutional background and data

In  this  study,  we  employ  high  frequency  data  on  the  prices  of
Euro-zone sovereign bonds and futures contracts. We analyze the 2013–
2017 period, which encompasses three years of QE, 2015–2017, and
two control years. We focus on contracts written on the Italian and
German treasuries. Futures contract are traded for two other Euro-zone
countries, France and Spain, but we do not include them in our analysis,
as their markets are significantly less developed and liquid: less than
1%  of  fixed-rate  special  repo  transactions  employ  French  treasuries
as collateral, while more than 70% involve German or Italian bonds;
further, futures on Spanish treasuries were first introduced in late 2015,
i.e., after the control period.

In this section, we review the ECB’s QE and the markets for bonds

and futures contracts.

2.1.  The ECB’s bond purchasing program

In  January  2015,  the  ECB  announced  a  public  sector  purchase
programme (PSPP), whereby it would purchase treasury bonds for over
a year, beginning on March 9, 2015, with an expected balance sheet
expansion of more than e1 trillion. The scale, scope, and duration of
the PSPP was unprecedented in the ECB’s history.

The  program  was  scheduled  to  last  up  to  September  2016,  but
was prolonged multiple times and ultimately suspended in 2018. The
program  consists  of  outright  purchases  at  the  rate  of e50  billion  a
month.  The  pace  was  increased  to e80  billion  between  April  2016
and March 2017. The monthly purchases are allocated across all Euro-
zone countries according to their participation in the ECB’s capital, a
function  of  the  country’s  population  and  GDP  (Koijen  et  al., 2021).
The ECB does not disclose details of the purchase process, but reports
that bond purchases took place via direct acquisition in the secondary
market.

In our analysis, we measure scarcity as the fraction of a country’s
treasury market held by the ECB.2 We obtain from the ECB the aggre-
gate amount of bonds purchased at a monthly frequency, at the country
level. The dashed lines in Fig. 2 show ECB’s monthly bond holdings
as a fraction of their corresponding outstanding amounts for Germany
and Italy. Each month, the ECB purchased, on average, e9 (13) billion
worth of Italian (German) bonds. Section IA.1 of the Appendix shows
monthly  purchased  amounts.  After  two  years  of  QE,  the  ECB  held
e9 ⋅ 24 = 216 (e13 ⋅ 24 = 312) billion worth of Italian (German) bonds,

1 See Joyce et al. (2012), Buraschi and Whelan (2016), and Borio and Zabai

(2018) for extensive reviews of the literature.

2 Bond purchases were conducted by the Eurosystem, that is, jointly by the
ECB and the Euro-zone’s national central banks. For simplicity, we refer to the
securities as being purchased and held by the ECB.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040043L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 2. Central bank holdings of sovereign bonds and the futures-bond arbitrage: This figure shows the time series of sovereign bonds holdings by the ECB as a fraction of their
outstanding amount and measures of the deviation between prices of bonds and futures. Panels A and B show 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, the annualized return from buying a futures and shorting
the CTD bond, in the absence of trading and funding costs, at a daily frequency. Panels C and D show the daily 1-min return correlation between futures contracts and deliverable
bonds, 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡. The dashed line represents the amount of bonds held at the ECB as a fraction of the total amount of bonds outstanding (on the right axes). Data on bond purchases
are obtained from the ECB and data on the amount of bond outstanding are obtained from the National Central Banks. Data on bond prices and characteristics are obtained from
MTS, data on repo transactions are obtained from MTS and BrokerTec, and futures data are obtained for the Eurex market via Thomson Reuters. The dashed vertical line marks
the implementation of the cash-collateralized securities lending facility.

or about 12% (15%) of the e1.8 trillion (e2.1) outstanding.3

2.3.  The futures market

Shortly  after  the  beginning  of  the  PSPP,  in  April  2015,  the  ECB
implemented  a  securities  lending  program,  whereby  market  partici-
pants could borrow the purchased securities against bond-collateral in a
repo/reverse-repo matched transaction. In order to counteract potential
scarcity on the bond market (Cœuré, 2017; Jank and Mönch, 2018),
the ECB initiated the CCSLF on December 15, 2016, whereby it began
lending securities on a cash-collateralized basis. This repo transaction
would take place at a rate equal to the minimum between the deposit
facility rate minus 30 basis points and the prevailing market repo rate.
We employ this policy change as a shock to scarcity in Section 5.1.

2.2.  The cash and repo bond markets

We  obtain  price  and  volume  data  for  the  cash  sovereign  bonds
from the MTS Group. The MTS trading system is an automated, quote-
driven electronic limit order interdealer market (Pelizzon et al., 2016).
The  dataset  provides  the  most  complete  representation  of  the  Euro-
zone sovereign bond market: millisecond-stamped quotes, orders, and
transactions.

To  study  the  determinants  of  the  mispricing  between  bonds  and
futures, we need to measure the costs of funding arbitrage positions,
the cost of borrowing/shorting a bond. We obtain from Bloomberg the
rate for a repo transaction for the general collateral (GC) Pooling ECB
EXTended Basket, and use it to proxy for the collateralized borrowing
rate (Mancini et al., 2015). We measure the cost of borrowing a specific
bond by the rate for special repo transactions that took place on the
two  largest  platforms,  MTS  Repo,  operated  by  the  MTS  Group,  and
BrokerTec, of the NEX Group (Arrata et al., 2020).

3 The ECB purchased both central and local government bonds. Since it
did so proportionally to their outstanding amount, the measure of scarcity we
employ, based on total public debt, is fitting for both. Local bonds make up a
quarter of German public debt and only a minuscule amount of Italian public
debt.

A  government  bond  futures  is  an  exchange-traded  instrument,  a
contract  for  the  seller  to  deliver  a  bond  to  the  buyer  by  a  delivery
date. Upon delivery, the buyer pays a price agreed upon on the date of
the trade. The seller can deliver any bond from a basket of deliverable
obligations, i.e., coupon-bearing bonds issued by the Italian (German)
government, with a remaining life of 8.5 to 11 (10.5) years and an
original maturity of up to 16 (11) years.

To obviate the seller’s incentive to short-change the buyer by deliv-
ering a bond that is substantially cheaper than the others, the futures
contract buyer will only pay a proportion of the agreed-upon futures
price, specific to the bond that is actually delivered, the bond’s conver-
sion factor. Appendix A details the workings of conversion factors.

While conversion factors even out the price differences across de-
liverable  bonds,  a  specific  bond  can  be  identified  as  the  one  that
the futures seller is most likely to deliver. This bond is the cheapest
between those that are deliverable, after taking into account its price
and  conversion  factor,  and  is  referred  to  as  the  cheapest-to-deliver
(CTD)  bond.  A  host  of  factors  determines  which  of  the  deliverable
bonds is CTD, including whether the bond is in abundant supply, and
the shape of the yield curve. In general, if interest rates are low, the
shortest duration bond is the CTD (Merrick et al., 2005).

The CTD bonds are clearly identified in our sample, having the low-
est basis for almost the entire life of a contract. The median frequency,
across contracts, that CTD has the lowest basis is 99.72% (99.84%) of
the time for Italy (Germany). We present details on the identification
of the CTD bond in Appendix A.

Our  bond  futures  data  include  millisecond-stamped  trades  and
quotes for long-term futures contracts traded on Eurex, an electronic
limit order market. Futures contracts deliveries follow a quarterly basis:
in March, June, September, and December. While contracts with up to
nine months to delivery are traded at the same time, we focus on the
nearest delivery, which is the most liquid contract. Our sample covers
20 contracts per country.

Descriptive statistics for all variables employed in our analysis are

presented in Table B.1 and Appendix B.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040044L. Pelizzon et al.

3.  The disconnect between bond and futures prices

value increases.

To measure the disconnect between cash bond and derivative mar-
kets,  we  consider  two  measures.  First,  the  return  of  a  strategy  of
shorting the bond and going long the futures. The steps of the arbitrage
strategy, at trade time 𝑡 for a contract with delivery date 𝑇 , are:

At time 𝑡
Borrow CTD at repo rate 𝑟𝑡,𝑇
Sell CTD at price 𝐵𝑡
Long futures contract at price 𝐹𝑡

At time 𝑇
Receive CTD from futures seller
Deliver CTD to repo buyer

Taking into account the conversion factor, coupons, and the gains from
the repo transaction, we calculate the basis, i.e., the difference between
the price of the CTD bond and a replicating portfolio made up of the
futures contract, for day 𝑡 and trading minute 𝑚:

𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑚,𝑡 =

1
100

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

(

)

(𝐵𝑚,𝑡 + 𝐴𝑖,𝑡+2
− 𝐴𝑇
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Forward Bond Price

𝑇 − (𝑡 + 2)
360

1 +

𝑟𝑡,𝑇

)

−

𝐹𝑚,𝑡 ⋅ 𝐶 𝐹
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
Futures Equivalent Price

)−1

( 𝑇 − 𝑡
365

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

(1)

360

where 𝐵𝑚,𝑡 is the CTD bond’s price and 𝐶 𝐹 its conversion factor, 𝐹𝑚,𝑡
the futures price, 𝑇 −(𝑡+2)
the term of the repo based on a 𝑡 + 2-day
settlement, 𝑟𝑡,𝑇 the reverse-repo rate (the arbitrageur lends cash and
earns  the  repo  rate),  and 𝐴𝑡+2 and 𝐴𝑇 are  coupons  accrued  by  the
trade settlement date and futures delivery, respectively.4 We average
the basis measure to obtain a daily estimate, 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 for country 𝑖 and
day 𝑡. We use the near delivery contract until 20 days to delivery, when
volume plummets, and the following contract thereafter.

We  follow Hazelkorn  et  al. (2022)  and  normalize  the  basis  by
time-to-delivery, to be able to compare observations across- and within-
contracts, and to capture the decay of the basis as delivery approaches.
The price differential is obtained in euros per e100 of face value, thus
the basis can be interpreted as the annualized return for going long a
cash bond and short a futures contract. It can also be interpreted as
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡 ≈ 𝑟𝑡,𝑇 − ̂𝑅𝑡,𝑇 , the difference between quoted and implied repo
rate.5 We use the latter as alternative dependent variable in Section 5.
The basis includes the option of delivering whichever bond is cheap-
est at delivery (Gay and Manaster, 1984; Kane and Marcus, 1986; Boyle,
1989; Hemler, 1990).  This  option  is  valuable  if  yields  are  close  to
6% (Johnson et al., 2017), a much higher level than the 2015–2017
average of 0.2% (1.7%) for Germany (Italy), making the optionality
negligible. Nonetheless, we ease the concern that the optionality affects
our  conclusions  by  normalizing  the  basis  by  time-to-delivery,  which
addresses the option’s time decay. Moreover, following the application
by Merrick et al. (2005) of the switching option model by Margrabe
(1978), we control for the volatility of the return differential between
first and second CTD bond and their price ratio in which the option

4 The inclusion of 𝐴𝑡+2 and 𝐴𝑇 accounts for coupons to be paid between
the cash-leg settlement date and the delivery date. We assume that coupons
that are paid-out are reinvested at the GC rate. We calculate the basis using
intraday data to increase the precision of our estimates, rather than relying on
noisier single-point, end-of-day quotes. It should be emphasized that the trade
leads to an arbitrage only if the positions are held to delivery, as posited in
our calculations.
5 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑚,𝑡 ≈

≈ 𝑟𝑡,𝑇 − ̂𝑅𝑡,𝑇 , holding
with equality if bonds trade at par, coupons are zero, and cash and repo trades
share settlement and day-count conventions.

( 𝐹𝑚,𝑡⋅𝐶 𝐹 +𝐴𝑇
𝐵𝑚,𝑡+𝐴𝑖,𝑡+2

𝐵𝑚,𝑡+𝐴𝑖,𝑡+2
100

) ( 𝑇 −𝑡

𝑟𝑡,𝑇 −

)−1]

− 1

365

[

Fig. 2 shows the time series of 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡 for Italian and German futures
contracts, in Panel A and B, respectively. The fraction of all sovereign
bonds held at the ECB is plotted as a dashed line. The figure illustrates
our first finding: Prior to the QE, the market functioning was efficient.
However, as the ECB reduced the bonds available to the public, the dis-
connect between the bond and futures contract increased substantially
in the scarcity created by the ECB. The vertical line marks the date of
the implementation of the CCSLF, which we study in Section 5.1: As
the ECB reduced bonds’ scarcity by lending them in exchange for cash,
the disconnect between markets subsided.

𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 is not the same as arbitrage profits. We calculate this mea-
sure  using  the  midquote  price  of  bonds,  assuming  the  cash  lent  to
borrow the bond is remunerated at the collateralized rate, Eurex’s GC
Pooling ECB EXTended rate, and that the overnight rate applies to the
term repo. 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, thus, includes the frictions faced by arbitrageurs:
(i)  transaction,  (ii)  security  borrowing,  and  (iii)  carrying  costs.  Our
objective here is not to capture arbitrage profits, but rather to show
that QE worsened these frictions, or limits to arbitrage.

Fig.  2 shows  that,  prior  to  the  QE,  the  frictions  included  in  the
calculation  were  generally  not  large  enough  to  cause  a  significant
deviation in the prices of bonds and futures. In Section 4 we show that,
as a result of the QE, the frictions increased to such a degree that the
price discovery process was significantly impeded. In Section 5 we show
the presence of arbitrage opportunities, once we compute 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 net of
these costs.

As a second measure of divergence between the bond market af-
fected  by  QE  and  derivatives  markets,  we  calculate  the  1-min  re-
turn correlation between the nearest futures contracts and an equally-
weighted portfolio of the 𝑁 𝐷 𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑡 deliverable bonds, for country-𝑖 day-𝑡:

𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟

(𝑁 𝑑 𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑡∑

𝑗=1

𝛥𝐵𝑖𝑗 𝑡𝑚∕𝐵𝑖𝑗 𝑡𝑚
𝑁 𝐷 𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑡

, 𝛥𝐹𝑖𝑡𝑚∕𝐹𝑖𝑡𝑚

)

(2)

Unlike 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, this measure of market functioning does not require us
to identify a CTD bond nor to take a stance on the funding rate. As
shown in Panels C and D of Fig. 2, 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 indicates that the effectiveness
of  hedging  a  portfolio  of  long-term  bonds  with  the  futures  contract
decreased as QE-related scarcity increased, in alignment with 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡.
To show the effect of the ECB’s purchases on the relation between
bond  and  future  prices,  we  regress 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 and 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 on 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵𝑖𝑡,  a
dummy that is one during QE, and zero otherwise, a country dummy
𝐷 𝐸𝑖, and year- and quarter-end dummies, as in Eq. (3):
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐸 𝐶 𝐵𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐷 𝐸𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝛽4𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡 (3)

Our sample consists of one observation per day for the German and
Italian futures contracts for each of the 1105 trading days in our sample
period, for a total of 2209 observations. Standard errors are two-way
clustered, at the country-delivery and date level. We report the results
in Table 1.

In Specification 1, we show that the basis is negligible before the
QE  intervention.  During  the  QE  intervention,  however,  bond  prices
increased more than that of the futures contract and the basis turned
positive,  averaging  around  50  bps,  significant  at  the  1%  level.  To
account for the time-varying dynamics of the ECB holdings in Fig. 2, we
𝑖𝑡 , the
repeat the analysis and substitute the dummy 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵𝑖𝑡 with 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
fraction of sovereign bonds held at the ECB for country 𝑖 on the last day
of the month of day 𝑡. The results in Specification 2 are both statistically
and  economically  significant:  a  10%  increase  in  bond  holdings  by
the  ECB  increased  the  basis  between  bonds  and  futures  by  46  bp.
Specification  3  and  4  repeat  the  analysis  using 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 as  dependent
variable. Prior to QE, the bond-futures 1-min return correlation was
92%. During QE, it decreases by 2.4%, or 2.3% per every 10% increase
in  bond  holdings.  Correlation  is  on  average  higher  for  the  German
sample, as captured by 𝐷 𝐸𝑖, which is mostly due to the lower number
of deliverables in German contracts.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040045L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 1
Futures-bond price disconnect and quantitative easing: This table
reports the results for the regression of measures of interest rate
market  efficiency  on  variables  capturing  QE-driven  scarcity.  The
dependent variable in Specifications 1 and 2 is 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, the differ-
ence in pricing between sovereign futures contracts and underlying
bonds, calculated as in Eq. (1), for country-𝑖 on day-𝑡. A positive
basis implies that bonds prices are higher than those for futures con-
tracts. 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 is calculated at a one-minute frequency and averaged
to create a daily series. The dependent variable in Specification
3 and 4 is the daily, 1-min return correlation between a futures
contract and an equally weighted portfolio of deliverable bonds,
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡. The explanatory variables are 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵𝑖𝑡, a dummy that equals
one during the ECB’s QE period and zero, otherwise, and 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 , the
fraction of bonds held at the ECB. We control for the nationality of
the contract, with the dummy variable 𝐷 𝐸𝑖, and deterministic year-
end and quarter-end effects. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate that parameters
are significantly different from zero at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level,
respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the delivery-country
and date level. The sample extends from January 2013 to September
2017, resulting in 1105 observations each for the two countries we
consider, Germany and Italy. Bond (futures) data are from MTS
(Eurex).  Data  on  the  European  general  collateral  rates  are  from
Bloomberg.

(1)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
−0.001∗∗
(−2.029)

0.005∗∗∗
(5.497)

0.003∗∗∗
(3.890)
0.003
(1.010)
0.000
(0.079)

(2)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
0.000
(−0.297)

(3)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡

(4)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡

0.918∗∗∗

0.913∗∗∗

(223.504)

(173.885)

0.046∗∗∗
(5.336)
0.002∗∗∗
(3.373)
0.003
(1.205)
0.000
(−0.100)

−0.024∗∗∗
(−4.024)

0.068∗∗∗

(10.840)
−0.014
(−1.269)
0.004
(1.031)

0.560

2195

−0.226∗∗∗
(−5.599)

0.073∗∗∗

(11.609)
−0.014
(−1.553)
0.004
(1.190)

0.575

2195

0.439
2209

0.556
2209

Constant

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵𝑖𝑡

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐷 𝐸𝑖

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

We  investigate  the  channels  through  which  the  scarcity  that  fol-
lowed  ECB  bond  purchases  increased  the  futures-bond  basis  in  Sec-
tion 4, where we show that QE increased the frictions involved in the
arbitrage trade, and impeded the price discovery process in the market
for interest rates. In Section 5, we return to the efficiency measures
and show that scarcity affected them through and above its effect on
arbitrage costs and use an exogenous policy change to identify scarcity
as the main driver.

4.  Quantitative easing and frictions

In  a  market  with  unlimited  capital  and  no  transaction  costs,  the
impact of ECB purchases on bond prices would be reflected one-to-one
in the derivatives markets. In the more realistic setting of a world with
market frictions, however, QE operations may impair the functioning of
markets, leading to sluggish price discovery and present impediments
to the law of one price. The frictions we identify are those of liquidity
and  collateral  availability,  as  outlined  by  ECB  and  FED  (Bernanke,
2012; Cœuré, 2015).

We can re-write Eq. (1) (dropping the subscript 𝑚) to make explicit

𝐵 𝐴𝑡 + 𝐴𝑖,𝑡+2

)

the costs it includes:
1
100
(

𝐵𝐵 𝑖𝑑
𝑡 +

𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡 =

[(

1
2
𝑇 − (𝑡 + 2)
360

1 +

− 𝐴𝑇 − 𝐹𝑡 ⋅ 𝐶 𝐹

(𝑅𝑡,𝑇 + 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡,𝑡+1 + 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡,𝑇
] ( 𝑇 − 𝑡
365

)−1

.

)

)

(4)

We  decompose  the  bond  mid-price 𝐵𝑡 into  the  bid  price  at  which
the bond sale would take place, 𝐵𝐵 𝑖𝑑
, and the transaction cost 𝐵𝑡 −
𝑡

𝑡

𝐵𝐵 𝑖𝑑
,  which  corresponds  to  half  the  bid–ask  spread 𝐵 𝐴𝑡.  Similarly,
we decompose the repo rate 𝑟𝑡,𝑇 into the special repo rate 𝑅𝑡,𝑇 and
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡,𝑇 = 𝑟𝑡,𝑇 − 𝑅𝑡,𝑇 . A bond’s specialness is the opportunity cost,
or  foregone  profit,  from  lending  cash  in  a  collateralized  transaction
to  obtain  that  specific  security,  and  should  be  zero  in  a  frictionless
market.6 We  can  further  decompose  the  repo  trade  specialness  into
an overnight component 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡,𝑡+1 = 𝑟𝑡,𝑡+1 − 𝑅𝑡,𝑡+1 and a term
component, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡,𝑇 = 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡,𝑇 − 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡,𝑡+1 =
(𝑟𝑡,𝑇 − 𝑅𝑡,𝑇 ) − (𝑟𝑡,𝑡+1 − 𝑅𝑡,𝑡+1), capturing the costs of carry for holding
the position for longer than a one-day period.

As scarcity worsens market liquidity (𝐵 𝐴𝑡) and collateral availabil-
ity  (𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡,𝑡+1 and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡,𝑇 ),  QE  impedes  the  price
discovery  process.  In  Section 4.1,  we  analyze  the  illiquidity  of  the
bond market. In Sections 4.2 and 4.3, we study the two components
of the cost of obtaining bonds via repo transactions, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡 and
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡.

4.1.  Quantitative easing and bond market liquidity

The issue of the overall effect of QE on market liquidity is ultimately
an empirical one, as a comprehensive theoretical framework of how
central bank asset purchases affect market liquidity is not available in
the literature. Intuitively, there are two opposing forces at play: On the
one hand, the presence of a price-insensitive buyer may increase liq-
uidity, as sellers can readily find a buyer and liquidate their positions.
On the other, the higher asset scarcity may increase dealers’ capacity
to extract rents and, thus, decrease market liquidity.

To highlight the tension between the two forces, we turn to standard
market  microstructure  models  to  develop  a  framework  to  link  asset
purchases to the market liquidity provided by dealers. Following the
taxonomy in the market microstructure literature, QE affects liquidity
if it impacts inventory costs, search costs, or informational asymmetry
costs. We hypothesize that it increases the first two costs, as informa-
tional  costs  are  unlikely  to  play  a  significant  role  in  the  context  of
sovereign bonds.

In an inventory model à la (Amihud and Mendelson, 1980), asset
purchases can be thought of as a parallel upward shift in the demand
function faced by dealers, or as a reduction in demand elasticity (Koijen
et al., 2021). In Section IA.2 of the Internet Appendix, we show that,
regardless of which parametrization is used, QE results in an increase in
the rent captured by the monopolistic market maker, who quotes larger
bid–ask  spreads.  That  is,  the  monopolist  power  of  the  dealer  in  the
inventory model delivers that QE has a deleterious impact on market
liquidity. The model is ambiguous regarding whether buyers and sellers
are equally impacted. Liquidity worsens for buyers, but may increase
for sellers, if the effect of a change in demand elasticity surpasses that
of  a  parallel  shift  in  demand.  Perhaps  surprisingly,  QE  might  result
in dealers having higher preferred inventory, as they capitalize on the
buyers’ higher willingness to pay if demand elasticity decreases enough.
In the search model by Duffie et al. (2005), QE can be interpreted as
a decrease in three different factors: (i) the overall supply of the asset,
(ii)  the  customer-dealer  meeting  frequency,  and  (iii)  the  probability
that  the  average  customer  sells  (since  the  central  bank  has  a  long
holding period). These factors may lengthen the time investors wait to
find a specific asset, increase dealers’ power and the opportunity costs
customers bear and, consequently, the bid–ask spread they pay. While a
decrease in meeting frequency unequivocally increases bid–ask spreads,
changes to the other two quantities have ambiguous effects on liquidity.
Depending on whether the market is demand- or supply-constrained,
a  decrease  in  supply  (or  in  the  high-to-low  type  investor  switching
probability) may result in lower bid–ask spreads if it decreases the rate

6 Duffie (1996) makes this point for off-the-run bonds: ‘‘. . . at least for many
old issues, the supply curve for repo collateral is sufficiently large relative to
the demand curve to drive specialness close to zero’’.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040046L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 3. Bond market illiquidity: This figure shows the time series of market illiquidity, measured by the bid–ask spread 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡, for the German (in red) and Italian (in blue) CTD
bonds. We compute the bid–ask spread at a one-minute frequency and average it throughout the day. The sample consists of 1057 bond-days for each of the two countries,
Germany and Italy. Our sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017. The QE period when the ECB was purchasing bonds is shaded in gray and starts in March 2015.
Bond price data and bond characteristics are obtained from MTS.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.)

at which investors trade through the dealer. The impact on bid- and
ask-side liquidity is similarly ambiguous. In Section IA.2 of the Internet
Appendix, we elaborate further on the mechanisms at play.

In  keeping  with  the  inconclusive  theoretical  arguments,  existing
empirical literature reaches mixed results regarding whether asset pur-
chases  by  the  central  bank  reduce  or  increase  liquidity: Schlepper
et al. (2020) show that flow effects during the first year of PSPP pur-
chases worsened market liquidity. D’Amico and King (2013), however,
show  that  the  Federal  Reserve  System’s  large-scale  asset  purchases
improved overall liquidity. Kandrac and Schlusche (2013) find no effect
while Christensen and Gillan (2022) show that QE lowers the liquidity
premiums of the targeted securities.

As far as our sample is concerned, Fig. 3 shows the time-series of
the bid–ask spread for the CTD bond for the German and Italian futures
contracts.  Noticeably,  the  highest  levels  of  illiquidity  were  reached
during  the  QE  period  for  both  countries.  While  an  upward  trend  is
visible for both time-series, the identity of the CTD bond and, with
it, the characteristics of the bond that determine its liquidity, varies
through time. We turn to the regression analysis to establish whether
central bank purchases affected bond market liquidity.

We regress the bid–ask spread of the CTD bond for country 𝑖 on day
𝑡, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡, on the fraction of bonds of that country held at the ECB, 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 ,
and a series of control variables. We estimate
𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐷 𝐸𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽5𝜎𝑖𝑡

+ 𝛽6𝑉 𝑜𝑙 𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑡
+ 𝛽7𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝛽8𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡,

(5)

where 𝐷 𝐸𝑖 is a dummy variable that is one, for a German asset; 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖
is a dummy variable, which is one if the bond was issued with 15 years
to maturity; 𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖 is the amount issued, in billions; 𝜎𝑖𝑡 is the bond
return  volatility;  and 𝑉 𝑜𝑙 𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑡 is  the  traded  volume,  in  billions.  We
include quarter- and year-end dummies. We control for bond-specific
determinants of liquidity in order to disentangle the effect of central
bank purchases on market liquidity of the CTD bond’s characteristics
from that of the ECB holdings, following the findings in Pelizzon et al.
(2016).7

7 On-the-run bonds tend to be more liquid and special than their off-the-
run counterparts. However, as treasury yields are currently far below 6%, CTD
bonds are the ones with the lowest duration i.e., the shortest maturities and
highest coupons, which in our sample of declining yields typically correspond

The sample for the regressions consists of one observation for the
CTD bond underlying the German and Italian futures contract, respec-
tively, for each of the 1105 trading days in our sample period, for a
total of 2209 observations. Standard errors are two-way clustered, at
the bond and date level. We report the results in Table 2.

In  Specification  1  of Table  2,  we  show  that,  as  bond  scarcity
increases following the central bank purchases, a 10% increase in the
stock of bond holding by the ECB increased the bid–ask spread by e1.6
cents,  corresponding  to  a  30%  increase  over  the  before-QE  level,  a
change that is highly significant, both economically and statistically.
By increasing the bid–ask spread on the cash bond market, the ECB
impeded the process of price discovery, allowing the mid-price of the
CTD  bond  to  further  diverge  from  its  futures  contract  counterpart
before  arbitrage  forces  could  profitably  intervene  and  enforce  their
convergence.

Including bond-specific determinants of market liquidity or year-
and quarter-end dummies does not significantly alter our conclusions,
as we show in Specification 2. As we show in Section 6, the liquidity
for all Italian and German long-term coupon-bearing bonds decreased
as they were purchased by the ECB during the QE period. The results
are robust to including the lagged dependent variable as a regressor, as
shown in Section 5.4.

To isolate the contribution to the increase in the bid–ask spread
of the purchases by the central bank and rule out that other factors
may have impacted the liquidity of sovereign bond markets, such as,
e.g., a wider adoption of Basel III regulations, we take a difference-in-
difference approach. We create a control group by calculating the daily
average bid–ask spread for all short-term bills: The ECB’s QE targeted
only bonds with a remaining maturity of more than two years (one
year from December 2016). To support the claim that the two samples
are comparable, we plot the parallel trends of their liquidity measures

to off-the-run bonds. All but one CTD bond are off-the-run. In Table IA-1 of
the Internet Appendix, we replicate the main analyses in the paper and include
controls for a bond’s time-to-maturity and on-the-run status. The results are
unchanged in terms of economic and statistical significance. As only one out of
the 18 CTD bonds is on-the-run, we are cautious in interpreting the parameter
for the associated dummy. In our analyses, we include a dummy for bonds
issued with 15 years to maturity, as this tenor is relatively uncommon and,
hence, these bonds might differ from the benchmark 10-year-to-maturity bonds
in some aspects, e.g. holder composition.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040047L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 2
Bond market illiquidity and quantitative easing: This
table  shows  the  results  for  the  regression  of  the
cheapest-to-deliver (CTD) bond’s bid–ask spread, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡,
on the fraction of bonds of that country held at the ECB,
𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 , for country 𝑖 and day 𝑡. We control for bond-
specific determinants of liquidity: the nationality of the
bond by including 𝐷 𝐸𝑖, a dummy that is one for the
German bond and zero otherwise; the volatility of the
bond returns, 𝜎𝑖𝑡; the bond’s traded volume, 𝑉 𝑜𝑙 𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑡,
in billions; whether the bond was a 15-year bond origi-
nally with the 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡 dummy; and the amount issued in
billions, 𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡. We include quarter- and year-end
dummies. In Specification 3 we perform a difference-in-
difference analysis, comparing the illiquidity of the CTD
bond with the average illiquidity of short-term Treasury
bills, which were not purchased in the context of the
QE. 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡 is a dummy that is zero for the CTD bond,
and one for the short-term Treasury bills series. Due to
data quality for the German bill series, we restrict the
analysis in Specification 3 to the Italian sample. We
indicate  the  statistical  significance  of  the  parameters
by ∗, ∗∗,  and ∗∗∗,  if  they  are  significantly  different
from zero at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively.
Standard  errors  are  two-way  clustered  at  the  bond
and day level. The sample is based on high-frequency
quotes from 1105 bond-days in our sample for each
of the two countries, Germany and Italy, from January
2013 to September 2017. Bond price data and bond
characteristics are obtained from MTS.

(1)
𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡
0.159∗∗∗
(3.832)

(2)
𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡
0.120∗∗
(2.661)

(3)
𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡
0.220∗∗
(2.728)
−0.198∗∗
(−2.442)
−0.021∗∗
(−2.875)

−0.044∗∗∗ −0.036∗∗∗
(−9.321)

(−5.473)

0.041∗∗∗
(9.704)

(−5.271)
0.011
(1.708)

0.031∗∗∗
(5.892)
−0.100∗∗∗ −0.081∗∗∗
(−6.521)
0.014∗∗
(2.424)
0.001
(0.548)
0.026∗∗
(2.117)
0.001
(0.328)

0.019
(1.534)
0.001
(0.739)

0.462
2209

0.598
2209

0.869
2208

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 × 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡

𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡

𝐷 𝐸𝑖

𝜎𝑖𝑡

𝑉 𝑜𝑙 𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑡

𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡

𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

(and the other dependent variables used in this section) in Section IA-
3 of the Internet Appendix. We restrict the analysis in Specification
3 to the Italian sample, since MTS does not have a good coverage of
German Treasury bills: We observe trading for Italian short term bonds
on 63% of the trading days. By contrast, German bills trade only on
4% of trading days. The results in Specification 3 of Table 2 confirm
that  only  the  bonds  that  were  purchased  by  the  ECB  became  more
𝑖𝑡 is statistically
illiquid during the QE period. The parameter for 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
and economically significant; however, the sum of this parameter with
the interaction between 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 and 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡, a dummy that is equal to 1
for the control sample, is not statistically different from zero.

Bid–ask spreads may represent a poor proxy for market liquidity
costs if they often coincide with the market’s minimum tick size and
show little variation. In the European bond market, however, this is a
remarkably unusual occurrence. Both in the literature (Pelizzon et al.,
2016; De Roure et al., 2019; Schlepper et al., 2020) and in our sample,
the average bid–ask spreads for German and Italian government bonds

are much larger than the usual 1 bp tick-size, supporting the use of
the bid–ask spreads as a liquidity measure. For robustness, we replicate
the results in Table 2 using alternative liquidity measures: the quantity
posted  at  the  best-bid  and  ask,  and  in  aggregate  on  the  bid-  and
ask-sides;  ‘‘deep’’  bid–ask  spreads,  or  the  loss  a  trader  would  incur
if  they  contemporaneously  bought  and  sold  2.5/5/15/30/50  million
euros; the steepness of the book. Tables IA-2 and IA-3 in the Internet
Appendix  show  that  our  results  do  not  depend  qualitatively  on  the
specific definition of market liquidity considered. Table IA-4 shows that
liquidity decreased similarly on the bid and ask sides of the market.

4.2.  Quantitative easing and repo specialness

A second channel through which the QE affects the futures-bond
basis is through the cost of borrowing the bond on the repo market.
To calculate 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 in Fig. 2, we use the European GC rate to capture
the rate earned by an arbitageur when they borrow the bond and lend
cash. In transactions that take place at the GC rate, it is not specified
which particular bond in a basket the cash-lender receives.

A transaction where the cash-lender specifies which bond to borrow
is a ‘‘special’’ repo transaction, which would take place at the special
repo rate. When a particular security is scarce and hard to come by, a
security-lender can borrow money at a rate lower than the GC rate, and
lend that security as collateral. 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡,𝑡+1 in Eq. (4) refers to the
loss of earning for an arbitrageur who lends cash at a rate lower than
the GC rate.

We report in Panel A of Fig. 4 the European GC repo rate and a
daily  measure  of  special  repo  rates  for  the  CTD  bond. 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑡 is
calculated for country 𝑖, on day 𝑡, as the quantity-weighted average
special repo rate from the CTD bond. We consider transactions from
the MTS and BrokerTec platforms with a tomorrow-next, spot-next, or
overnight term, which make up 98% of all transactions in our sample.
We consider the slope of the term structure of repo rates in Section 4.3.
Panel B of Fig. 4 shows the CTD bond specialness, the difference
between  the  European  GC  and 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑡, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 = 𝐺 𝐶𝑡 −
𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑡. While special repo rates were fairly close to the GC rate
in the first half of the sample, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 increased as QE made bond
scarce, especially for the German market: as more and more bonds were
held at the central bank, institutions looking for collateral had to obtain
it on the repo market via a reverse repo transaction, and accept lower
interest gains.

We  test  how  CTD  repo  rates  were  affected  by  scarcity  through
regressing 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 on 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 ,  the  proportion  of  bonds  held  by
the  ECB,  and  other  covariates.  We  report  in Table  3 the  results  of
estimating:
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 =𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐷 𝐸𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3𝜎𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡

+ 𝛽5𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽6𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡
+ 𝛽7𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝛽8𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(6)

Specification 1 shows that a 1% increase in the holding of sovereign
bonds at the ECB increases their specialness by 2.77 bp, a significant
increase over the pre-QE specialness of 5 bp. From the point of view
of an arbitrageur, the collateral scarcity resulting from the ECB’s QE
increased the specialness of sovereign bonds, which decreased her gains
from lending cash in exchange for borrowing the CTD bond.8

8 There is a second segment of the broadly-defined securities lending mar-
ket, the ‘‘sec-lending’’ market (Adrian et al., 2013). Both repurchase agreement
and sec-lending transactions resemble collateralized loans, but differ in some
legal and institutional aspects (Ruchin, 2011; Huszar and Simon, 2022; Adrian
et al., 2013). We focus here on the repo market, which is the key money-
market for monetary policy implementation. However, we obtain data for the
sec-lending market from Markit, and confirm that all our findings hold in the

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040048L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 4. General collateral, special repo rates, and specialness: This figure shows the time series of the repo rates for Germany and Italy. Panel A shows the daily special repo rates
for the CTD bonds, measured as the volume-weighted average special repo rate of all transactions with a one-day term, for the German (in red) and Italian (in blue) CTD bonds.
The dot-dashed black line represent European general collateral rate, 𝐺 𝐶𝑡, with a one-day term. Panel B plots the CTD bond specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡, defined as the difference
between the European GC rate and the CTD special repo rate, measured as the volume-weighted average special repo rate of all transactions with a one-day term. Repo data are
obtained from the MTS group and from BrokerTec. The European GC rate is from Bloomberg. Our sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017. The QE period when
the ECB was purchasing bonds is shaded in gray and starts in March 2015.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)

In Specifications 2, we include bond-specific characteristics on the
right-hand side, which does not affect the significance of our results.9
In fact, the result that specialness increased during the QE period can
be shown to hold for all QE-eligible Italian and German bonds, as we
show in Section 6.

In Specification 3, we repeat the difference-in-difference approach
from Section 4.1, and compare the specialness of the treated group, the

broader  securities  lending  market,  i.e.,  both  sec-lending  and  repo  markets.
Results are available upon request.

9 The repo rates series are stationary. We verify the non-stationarity of both
the series and the residuals of Specification 1 with an Augmented Dickey–
Fuller test with two lags, and we cannot reject, at the 1% confidence level,
the alternative hypothesis of an absence of a unit-root in the series for either
country. In other words, the trends in Fig. 4 are of a deterministic kind, linear
in ECB holdings, and not of a stochastic nature. We show the stationarity of
the variables of interest in Section 5.4.

Italian and German CTD bonds, to that of the control group, the short-
term  bills  of  the  corresponding  country,  which  were  not  purchased
by  the  ECB.  While  the  long-term  bonds  are  not  more  special  than
their short-term counterparts prior to the intervention, as 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡 is not
statistically significant, ECB purchases increase specialness significantly
more for the CTD than for the short-term bonds, with a 1% increase in
overall sovereign bonds held at the ECB driving specialness up for the
short-term bonds by 1.09 bp (2.69 − 1.78 = 0.9 bp), which we interpret
as a spillover effect.

In a contemporaneous paper, using proprietary ECB bond purchase
data, Arrata et al. (2020) reach similar conclusions using bond-specific
purchases, rather than aggregate purchases, as we do. Their analysis,
however,  focuses  on  flow  rather  than  stock  effects,  which  explain
short-term changes in the repo rate, rather than longer term, stock-
driven trend dynamics, which we focus on. Corradin and Maddaloni
(2020) confirm that an earlier central bank intervention affected repo
specialness for Italian bonds.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)1040049L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 3
Repo  specialness  and  quantitative  easing:  This  table  shows  the
results  for  the  regression  of  the  cheapest-to-deliver  (CTD)  repo
specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡,  on  a  measure  of  QE-driven  scarcity.
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 is obtained at the country 𝑖 and day 𝑡 level, and is
calculated as the difference between the European general collateral
repo rate and the bonds’ transaction volume-weighted special repo
rate. We capture scarcity as the fraction of bonds of that country
that are held at the ECB, 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 . We control for bond characteristics:
nationality, by including 𝐷 𝐸𝑖, a dummy that is one for the German
contract and zero otherwise; returns volatility, 𝜎𝑖𝑡; bid–ask spread,
𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡;  original  maturity, 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡
is  one  if  it  was  issued  as  a  15-
year bond; and amount issued, 𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡, in billions. We include
quarter- and year-end dummies. In Specification 3, we perform a
difference-in-difference analysis, comparing the specialness of the
CTD bond with the average specialness of short-term treasury bills,
which  were  not  purchased  in  the  context  of  the  QE. 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡
is  a
dummy that is zero for the CTD bond and one for the short-term
Treasury bills series. We indicate the statistical significance of the
parameters by ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗, if they are significantly different from
zero at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. Standard errors are
two-way clustered at the bond and day level. The sample is based
on high-frequency quotes from 1105 bond-days in our sample for
each of the two countries, Germany and Italy, from January 2013
to September 2017. Bond price data and bond characteristics are
obtained from MTS. Repo transactions data are provided by the
MTS Group and BrokerTec.

(1)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡
2.766∗∗∗
(5.707)

(2)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡
2.232∗∗∗
(3.884)

0.145∗∗∗
(3.893)

0.454
2208

0.112∗∗∗
(3.018)
−0.002
(−0.101)
0.421
(0.853)
−0.040
(−0.660)
0.017
(1.479)
0.641
(1.622)
0.016
(0.469)

0.520
2208

(3)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡
2.689∗∗∗
(6.201)
−1.784∗∗∗
(−3.463)
0.046
(1.392)
0.137∗∗∗
(6.524)
0.016
(0.824)
0.112
(0.480)

0.260
(1.671)
0.009
(0.527)

0.630
4315

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 × 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡

𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡

𝐷 𝐸𝑖

𝜎𝑖𝑡

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡

𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡

𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

4.3.  Quantitative easing and the term of the repo specialness

The  rate 𝑟𝑡,𝑇 in  Eq.  (1) represents  the  cost  of  carry,  the  rate  for
a  repo  transaction  to  borrow  the  CTD  bond  from  day 𝑡 to  delivery
𝑇 . In Eq. (4), we decompose 𝑟𝑡,𝑇 into two components: The overnight
specialness, i.e., the ‘‘level’’ of the term structure of repo rates; and a
term component, the additional cost of borrowing the bond for longer
than overnight.

In Section 4.2, we show that 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 increases as the ECB pur-
chases accentuate bond scarcity; if investors expect the ECB purchases
to  continue,  and  the  specialness  to  increase,  they  should  demand  a
higher premium for lending the bond for a longer period of time than
if they were to lend the bond overnight. An increase in the slope of
the specialness term structure, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡,𝑇 , would constitute a
further friction to an arbitrageur trading the futures-bond basis.

Term repo transactions are rare in our sample, constraining us from
characterizing bond-specific term-structures of repo rate. Hence, to test
whether ECB purchases affected the slope of the term structure of the
CTD repo rate, we take two approaches. The first relies on employing a
relation between observable overnight repo rates dynamics and their

term  structure,  as  in Vasicek (1977).  The  second  approach  involves
characterizing a common term structure, pooling all repo transactions.
To our knowledge, there is no explicit model for the term structure
of repo rates. D’Amico and Pancost (2022) develop a model for bond
prices  that  accounts  for  specialness  but,  as  repo  transactions  last  a
single  period,  their  model  cannot  deliver  a  term  structure  of  repo
rates.  However,  one  can  think  of  the  special  repo  rate  as  a  compo-
nent of the bond yield, in that a decrease in the repo rate decreases
the  required  return  of  the  bond  (Duffie, 1996).10 Applying  standard
models for the interest rate process to repo rates, as in Vasicek (1977),
shows that a higher volatility of the instantaneous special repo rate
translates into a lower slope of the term structure of repo rates. As
specialness  is  negatively  related  to  the  special  repo  rate,  a  higher
repo rate (or specialness) volatility translates into a higher slope for
the term structure of specialness. For this first approach, we calculate
the dispersion of the specialness of the CTD bond, as its interquartile
spread, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡,  or,  alternatively,  its  standard  deviation,
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡. We plot the time series of 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡 in Fig. 5.
For  our  second  approach,  we  aggregate  all  special  repo  transac-
tions  for  each  country  and  day  into  two  maturity  buckets:  the  first
containing  overnight  transactions,  and  a  second  transactions  with  a
term of five days or longer. We then calculate 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡 as
the  difference  between  the  average  specialness  for  the  two  buckets,
obtaining a country-specific daily slope of the repo term structure. The
assumption behind this approach is that the term structure of repo rates
is homogeneous at a country-day level.

To investigate this third channel through which the QE can affect
relative  pricing  between  bonds  and 
regress
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡,  and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡 on  the
amount  of  bonds  held  at  the  ECB  and  bond-specific  variables,  and
report the results in Table 4:
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡 =𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐷 𝐸𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3𝜎𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡

futures,  we 

+ 𝛽5𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡
+ 𝛽6𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽7𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝛽8𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡𝜀𝑖𝑡

(7)

Specification 1 in Table 4 shows that a 10% increase in the quantity
of bonds held at the central bank increased the dispersion in the repo
specialness for transactions involving the CTD bond by 4 bp, over a pre-
QE average of 3 bp. Specifications 2, 3, and 4 confirm the finding even
after  including  bond-specific  controls  and  using  the  other  measures.
The increased dispersion and steeper term structure, resulting from the
CTD bond’s scarcity, hinders the price discovery process, resulting in
an increased carry cost borne by the arbitrageur. In Section 6 we show
that the repo dispersion increased for all long-term bonds during QE.
In  Specifications  5  and  6,  we  repeat  the  difference-in-difference
approach from the previous sections and compare the volatility of the
specialness of the treated group, the German and Italian CTD bonds,
to that of the control group, the short-term bills of the corresponding
country, which were not purchased by the ECB. While the specialness
of the long-term CTD bonds is less volatile than that of the short-term
bonds, the scarcity following ECB purchases has a high and positive
effect on the dispersion of specialness for CTD bonds and a 74%–82%
smaller effect on short-term bonds, confirming our hypothesis.

The dispersion in the repo rate can affect the futures-bond basis
through another channel. In the absence of term transactions, an ar-
bitrageur shorting the bond would need to roll-over her repo position

10 From  Proposition  1  in Duffie (1996),  we  can  derive  the  relationship
between a bond’s yield and its special repo rate. The yield of a zero-coupon
bond that trades on special is 𝑦 = 100
− 1, i.e., a function of the price
𝑃
𝑃 of an identical bond that trades at the general collateral repo rate, of the
unsecured borrowing and lending rate 𝑟, and of the special repo rate 𝑅. It is
clear that yield and repo rate are positively related.

1+𝑅
1+𝑟

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400410L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 5. Repo specialness dispersion: This figure shows the time series of the dispersion of the specialness for the CTD bonds, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡. We measure the dispersion as the
difference between the 75th and the 25th percentile of the distribution of the repo specialness for transactions involving the German (in red) and Italian (in blue) CTD bonds. The
specialness is calculated as the difference between the special repo rate for the CTD bond and the European general collateral rate. We consider transactions that have a one-day
term. Bond and repo data are obtained from the MTS group and from BrokerTec. Our sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017. The QE period when the ECB was
purchasing bonds is shaded in gray and starts in March 2015.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)

Table 4
Specialness dispersion and quantitative easing: This table shows the results for the regression of measures of
dispersion of the CTD bond’s specialness on a measure of QE-driven scarcity. The dispersion is measured as
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡, defined as the difference between the 75th and the 25th percentile of the distribution of the
CTD bond repo specialness for the CTD Bond for country 𝑖 on day 𝑡. Alternatively, we capture the dispersion
as 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡, the standard deviation of that same distribution. Finally, we calculate a country-specific
slope of the term structure of the repo specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡, as the difference between the average
specialness for trades with a term of five days or longer and the average specialness for over-night trades,
for all repo trades of country 𝑖 on day 𝑡. We control for bond characteristics: nationality, by including 𝐷 𝐸𝑖,
a dummy that is one for the German contract and zero otherwise; returns volatility, 𝜎𝑖𝑡; bid–ask spread, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡;
original maturity, 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡 is one if it was issued as a 15-year bond; and amount issued, 𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡, in billions.
We include quarter- and year-end dummies. In Specifications 5 and 6, we perform a difference-in-difference
by comparing 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡 and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡 for the CTD bond with the corresponding average for
short-term Treasury bills, which were not purchased by the ECB. 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡 is a dummy that is zero for the CTD
bond and one for the short-term treasury bills series. We indicate the statistical significance of the parameters
by ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗, if they are significantly different from zero at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. Standard
errors are two-way clustered at the bond and day level, apart from Specification 4, where the left-hand side
variable is measured at the country-level, where we cluster by country-delivery and date. The sample is based
on high-frequency quotes from 1105 bond-days in our sample for each of the two countries, Germany and Italy,
from January 2013 to September 2017. Bond price data and bond characteristics are obtained from MTS. Repo
transactions data are provided by the MTS Group and BrokerTec.

(1)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡
0.423∗∗∗
(3.847)

(2)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡
0.286∗
(1.998)

(3)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡
0.249∗∗
(2.439)

(4)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡
0.244∗∗
(2.196)

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 × 𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡

𝐵 𝑖𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑡

𝐷 𝐸𝑖

𝜎𝑖𝑡

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡

𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡

𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

0.010
(1.150)

0.255
2208

0.008
(1.034)
0.001
(0.199)
0.073
(0.762)
0.004
(1.595)
0.002
(0.139)
0.070∗∗∗
(2.969)
0.025∗∗
(2.662)

0.317
2208

−0.001
(−0.127)
0.001
(0.275)
0.038
(0.423)
0.002
(1.514)
−0.007
(−0.830)

0.061∗∗∗
(5.609)
0.019∗∗∗
(3.242)

0.372
2204

(5)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡
0.516∗∗∗
(3.323)
−0.456∗∗
(−2.789)

0.026∗∗∗
(2.888)
0.011∗
(2.055)
0.004
(0.736)
0.014
(0.255)

(6)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡
0.390∗∗∗
(3.491)
−0.306∗∗
(−2.515)
0.018∗∗
(2.510)
0.008∗
(2.035)
0.004
(0.918)
0.013
(0.317)

0.075∗∗∗
(9.366)

−0.055∗∗∗
(−2.794)
−0.001
(−0.111)

0.258
1806

0.103
(1.388)
0.019∗∗∗
(3.449)

0.216
4315

0.080
(1.417)
0.016∗∗∗
(3.864)

0.242
4309

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400411L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 5
Frictions, Arbitrage, and residual effect of quantitative easing: This table shows the results for the regression of measures of
interest rate market functioning on a measure of QE-driven scarcity. The dependent variables are: 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, the difference in
pricing between sovereign futures contracts and underlying bonds, for country-𝑖 on day-𝑡, where a positive basis implies that
bonds prices are higher than those for futures contracts; the daily, 1-min return correlation between a futures contract and
an equally weighted portfolio of deliverable bonds, 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡; 𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡, the repo rate a bond would need to trade at for the
basis to be zero; 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, that is 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 net of trading and security-borrowing costs. The main explanatory variable is
𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 , the fraction of bonds held at the ECB. We control for the nationality of the contract, with the dummy variable 𝐷 𝐸𝑖, and
deterministic year-end and quarter-end effects. We control for frictions to the arbitrage process, that is the CTD bond’s bid–ask
spread, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡 and specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡. We proxy for the cost of carry using the slope of the repo specialness term structure,
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡, calculated as the difference between the average specialness for trades with a term of five days or longer
and the average specialness for over-night trades, for all repo transactions of country 𝑖 on day 𝑡, and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡, the
difference between the 75th and the 25th percentile of CTD bond repo specialness. We capture the quality option embedded in
the futures contract with the volatility of the return differential between first and second CTD bond, 𝜎12𝑖𝑡, and their price ratio,
𝑃 12𝑖𝑡. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate that parameters are significantly different from zero at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively.
Standard errors are clustered at the delivery-country and date level. The sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017,
resulting in 1105 observations each for the two countries we consider, Germany and Italy. Bond (futures) data are from MTS
(Eurex). Data on the European general collateral rates are from Bloomberg.

(1)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡

(2)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡

(3)
𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡

(4)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡

(5)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐷 𝐸𝑖

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝜎12𝑖𝑡

𝑃 12𝑖𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

0.070∗∗∗
0.003∗∗∗
(3.467)
(6.650)
0.032∗∗∗ −0.109
(−0.948)
(3.305)
0.007∗∗∗ −0.026∗∗
(−2.147)
(2.882)
0.017∗∗
−0.060
(−1.456)
(2.359)

−0.004∗∗∗
(−3.606)
−0.001
(−1.234)

0.010
(0.850)
0.005
(1.421)

−0.305∗∗∗
(−3.768)
−3.583∗∗∗
(−4.321)
−0.715∗∗∗
(−3.033)
−1.740∗∗
(−2.515)

0.363∗∗∗
(4.474)
0.071∗
(1.738)

0.607
2208

0.541
2194

0.639
2208

(7)
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
0.012∗∗
(2.361)
0.002∗∗∗
(3.949)

(8)
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
0.011∗
(1.773)
0.002∗∗∗
(3.518)

(−4.217)

0.025∗∗∗ −0.203∗∗∗
(2.941)
0.074∗∗∗
0.002∗∗∗
(7.406)
(3.639)
0.019∗∗
−0.012
(−0.111)
(2.075)
0.005∗∗
−0.003
(2.243)
(−0.838)
0.013∗∗∗ −0.029
(−0.967)
(2.896)

(6)
𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡
−3.141∗∗∗
(−4.264)
−0.265∗∗∗
(−4.548)
−1.895∗∗∗
(−2.795)
−0.364∗∗
(−2.615)
−1.234∗∗∗
(−3.406)

−0.001
(−0.851)
0.000
(−0.936)
0.000
(0.297)
−0.005
(−0.286)

0.668
2165

−0.009
(−0.903)
0.005
(1.391)

0.576
2194

0.052
(0.481)
0.055
(1.604)
−0.069
(−0.818)
0.609
(0.405)

0.741
2165

−0.005
(−1.566)
0.001
(1.684)
−0.002
(−1.539)
−0.004
(−0.237)

0.195
2165

0.012∗∗∗
(2.990)
0.005∗∗∗
(3.169)
−0.002∗
(−1.898)
0.001∗
(1.840)
−0.002
(−1.639)
0.001
(0.054)

0.266
1776

daily, exposing herself to the repo rollover risk. We elaborate on this
point in the next section.

5.  Arbitrage opportunities, securities lending facility, and regula-
tory frictions

Section 3 documents that 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 increases in the fraction of bonds
held  at  the  ECB.  We  next  show  that  the  effect  occurs  through  the
channels  we  consider  in  Section 4 and  quantify  the  contribution  of
each  friction.  Consistent  with  the  decomposition  in  Eq.  (4),  we  ex-
tend  the  regression  in  Eq.  (3) to  include 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡,  and
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡:
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐷 𝐸𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽4𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡

+ 𝛽5𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡
+ 𝛽6𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝛽7𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(8)

We report the results in Table 5. Specification 1 and 2 show that the
three channels we consider contribute to the worsening of the pricing
efficiency in the market for interest rates: As bonds become scarcer
and their market and funding liquidity deteriorates, the relative pricing
(correlation) between bonds and futures widens (decreases).

The three frictions are significant at the 1% level and explain 61%
(54%)  of  the  variation  in 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 (𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡).11 Funding  and  carry  cost

11 Standard  errors  are  clustered  at  the  delivery-country-  and  date-level.
Results  based  on Driscoll  and  Kraay (1998)  (unreported)  deliver  higher

have the largest economic impact: A one-standard deviation increase in
𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡 increases 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 by 0.24 standard deviations. A similar increase
in 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡 increases 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 by 0.49 and
0.21 standard deviations, respectively, indicating that frictions faced
in  the  repo  market  were  the  largest  determinant  of  the  disconnect
between the cash bond and futures markets.12 Results for 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 are
similar, since a one-standard deviation increase in 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 reduces
the hedging effectiveness of using a futures contract by 0.16 standard
deviations, about twice the magnitude of a similar increase in the other
two frictions.

We  introduce  an  alternative  for  measuring  the  difference  in  rel-
ative  pricing  between  bonds  and  futures,  which  is  to  calculate  the
derivative-implied risk-free rate, or implied repo rate, 𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡 =
( 𝐹𝑡⋅𝐶 𝐹 +𝐴𝑇
, from which we subtract the ECB’s deposit facil-
𝐵𝑡+𝐴𝑖,𝑡+2

) 360

𝑇 −(𝑡+2)

− 1

ity rate to adjust for four discrete jumps in the series. This measure is
common in the works that focus on the difference between derivative-
implied  risk-free  rates  (Fleckenstein  and  Longstaff, 2020; Hazelkorn
et al., 2022; Van Binsbergen et al., 2022). We report the series in Figure
IA-9. In Specification 3, we repeat Specification 2 with 𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡
as dependent variable and, consistent with our previous analyses, we
find that a one-standard deviation in 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 decreases the implied

𝑡-values.
12 When 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 is the dependant variable, we employ costs variables based
on the CTD alone, for simplicity. Results based on costs for all deliverable
bonds, reported in Table IA-5 of the Internet Appendix, are virtually identical.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400412L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 6. Futures-bond arbitrage opportunities: This figure shows the time series of arbitrage profit a trader would have made if she were to sell the bond and buy the corresponding
futures contract for Germany (in red) and Italy (in blue), 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡. The tradable basis is calculated at a one-minute frequency according to Eq. (9) and averaged across the day,
and is calculated as an annualized return. We assume the arbitrageur establishes the position by selling the bond at the bid price, and buying the futures at the ask price, and
that the repo transaction needed to establish the bond position took place at the transaction volume-weighted average special repo rate for that day. Bond data are obtained from
the MTS group, and futures data are obtained from Thomson Reuters for the Eurex market. The repo rate is from transactions that took place on the MTS Repo and BrokerTec
platforms. Our sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017. The QE period when the ECB was purchasing bonds is shaded in gray and starts in March 2015.  (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

repo by twice as much (0.47 standard deviations) as a similar change
to the other frictions.

As we find that scarcity increases the treasuries’ convenience yield,
our  results  differ  from  those  by Van  Binsbergen  et  al. (2022),  who
focus the Federal Reserve’s QE efforts. While interesting, studying this
difference is beyond the scope of this paper, and may relate to more
significant asset scarcity in the Eurozone (Schaffner et al., 2019), the
term of the rate we consider (long- vis-à-vis short-term rates), or safety
vs. liquidity scarcity (Vissing-Jorgensen, 2019).13

To gauge whether the QE-driven scarcity had residual effects on the
basis,  we  repeat  the  analysis  and  include 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 as  a  regressor.  We
report the results in Specifications 4–6 of Table 5. We also calculate
the profit an arbitrageur would earn if they engaged in the bond-futures
trade, netting 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 in Eq. (1) from costs, by replacing the bond price
with its bid-quote, 𝐵𝐵 𝑖𝑑
, futures price with its ask-quote, and GC rate
with the special repo rate 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑡, and obtaining:
)

(

[

𝑡

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 =

(𝐵𝐵 𝑖𝑑

𝑡 + 𝐴𝑖,𝑡+2

)

𝑇 − (𝑡 + 2)
360
)−1

1 +
] ( 𝑇 − 𝑡
365

.

𝑅𝑡,𝑡+1

(9)

−𝐴𝑇 − 𝐹 𝐴𝑠𝑘

𝑡

⋅ 𝐶 𝐹

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, shown in Fig. 6, is obviously lower than 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 and often
significantly negative. An arbitrageur would not engage in the trade on
such days. Overwhelmingly, however, 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 is positive during,
and not prior, QE: 72% of days when 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 is positive happen
during  QE.  We  repeat  the  analysis  using 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 as  dependent
variable  and  reports  the  results  in  Specification  7  of Table  5.  All
specifications indicate that ECB purchases had residual effects on the
relative price of futures and bonds, i.e., beyond their effects on the
frictions we considered.

Residual effects can arise for two reasons. First, they can capture a
temporary increase in bond prices from the sheer buying pressure of the
ECB’s purchases. Second, they may capture the roll-over risk premium
included in the trade, which is affected by scarcity: As special term-
repos are seldom available, market participants may have to rely on
rolling over overnight repo positions, which leaves them exposed to
increases in bond specialness and scarcity over the life of the trade.
Market  participants  holding  a  synthetic  short  bond  position  need  to

13 Paret and Weber (2019) show that the Bund scarcity led to an increase
in convenience yields.

be  compensated  for  the  risk  they  are  taking,  a  component  of  the
bond  price  that D’Amico  and  Pancost (2022)  refer  to  as  the  special
collateral risk premium. Specification 8 shows that 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡,
which proxies for roll-over risk, and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡, capturing some
degree of term-repo slope, are indeed significant at the 1% level in
explaining 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡. 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 is similarly significant in Specifications
4–8, consistent with 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡 not fully reflecting the CTD’s
specialness slope, if the latter is more sensitive to scarcity than the slope
for the average bond, and with 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡 not fully capturing
the rollover–risk premium, if the latter increases in scarcity.

Our results so far support the hypothesis that the price discovery
process was significantly perturbed during QE. In the remainder of this
section, we argue for a causal link and rule out alternative explana-
tions.  To  identify  scarcity  as  the  main  driver  of  our  results,  we  use
an exogenous policy change in Section 5.1. Violations of the law of
one price like those we observe have been linked in the literature to
intermediaries’ constraints. In Section 5.2, we argue that the reduction
in price discovery that we observe was not primarily driven by balance
sheet  costs.  In  Section 5.3,  we  show  that  counterfactual  arbitrage
relations did not worsen in our sample period, as they do not involve
assets that experienced significant scarcity. In Section 5.4, we conduct
robustness analyses.

5.1.  The cash-collateralized securities lending facility

To identify scarcity as the channel through which QE affects the
efficiency of the market for interest rates, we rely on a natural exper-
iment involving the ECB’s implementation of the CCSLF, which made
bonds purchased by the central bank available to be borrowed back by
market participants via repo transactions, i.e., using cash as collateral.
Between April 2015 and December 2016, market participants could
only borrow from central banks the securities that had been purchased
under QE via repo–reverse-repo matched transactions. In other words,
they  could  borrow  a  sovereign  bond  by  pledging  another  safe  asset
as collateral (asset-collateralized security borrowing). Given that the
quality  of  pledged  asset  could  not  be  lower  than  the  quality  of  the
borrowed  asset,  these  transactions  did  not  affect  the  overall  avail-
ability  of  treasuries.  With  the  implementation  of  the  CCSLF  in  De-
cember 2016, however, the ECB allowed market participants to also
borrow  government  bonds  against  cash  (cash-collateralized  security
borrowing).

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400413L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 7. 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 and securities lending: This figure shows the time series 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, the annualized return from buying a futures and shorting the CTD bond, in the absence of trading
and funding costs. The dashed line represents the amount of bonds borrowed from the ECB against cash-collateral (on the right axes). The cash-collateralized securities lending
facility was implemented in December 2016. Data on bond lending are obtained from the ECB. Data on bond prices and characteristics are obtained from MTS, data on repo
transactions are obtained from MTS and BrokerTec, and futures data are obtained for the Eurex market via Thomson Reuters.

For the purpose of our identification strategy, the key difference
between  the  two  facilities  is  that  the  security-collateralized  lending
facility could only alleviate the scarcity differential between two bonds,
and  had  no  effect  on  the  overall  stock  of  safe  asset  available.  The
CCSLF, on the other hand, allowed market participants to increase the
amount of treasuries available on the market, as the bonds left the ECB’s
holdings and entered the private market. As scarcity includes both a
security-specific and a common component, the implementation of the
CCSLF acted as a shock to the latter.

This policy change eased market functioning. The effect of a de-
crease in scarcity on the price discovery process is shown in Fig. 7,
where  we  plot  the  amount  of  assets  borrowed  against  cash  in  the
Eurosystem,  together  with  our  measure  of  bond  market  efficiency,
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡.  As  QE  induced  scarcity,  as  shown  in  the  previous  sections,
market functioning was impaired. Following the implementation of the
CCSLF,  market  participants  borrowed  securities  against  cash,  which
increased asset availability, reduced treasury scarcity, and eased fund-
ing frictions, in turn allowing the price of the cash bond to converge
to that of the futures. Accordingly, Fig. 7 shows that, following the
higher CCSLF utilization in January and March, 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 subsided from
its highest levels.

It is worth noting that borrowing securities via the CCSLF does not
affect a bank’s capital ratios. The value of the leverage ratio denomi-
nator is unchanged after engaging in CCSLF, despite the increase in a
bank’s securities financing transactions, as the total exposure is unaf-
fected. Similarly, the liquidity buffer in the numerator of the liquidity
coverage ratio is unchanged, even if the bank’s reserves decrease, as
the holdings of safe assets increase by an identical amount. While their
capital ratios were unchanged, market participants’ ability to borrow
securities  from  the  ECB’s  holdings  affects  asset  scarcity,  as  the  cash
lender  obtains  the  right  of  use  of  the  collateral  and  may  repledge
it. Internet Appendix Section IA.4 illustrates these arguments using a
simple balance sheet example.

To size the impact that the CCSLF had on the market for security
borrowing, we calculate the daily volume for special repo transactions
that occurred on the MTS and BrokerTec platforms for all Euro-zone
countries. We show the series in Figure IA-10 of the Internet Appendix.
On December 14, 2016, the day before the CCSLF was implemented, the
total daily special repo volume was e187 bn, with Germany and Italy
accounting for 38% and 40% of the total, or 78% combined. The pricing
of the CCSLF made it a viable option only for borrowing bonds that had
a specialness higher than 30 bps. Of the e187 bn worth of transactions,
e57 bn took place above that level, 85% of which involved German
and Italian bonds. The CCSLF, thus, represented a sizeable alternative
to  the  repo  market:  The  average  daily  utilization  of  the  CCSLF  was

e13 billions, a provision of security lending equal to 23% of the target
market.

We show that the CCSLF implementation improved market func-
tioning by repeating the analyses from Tables 1 and 5 and interacting
𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 with 𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡,  a  dummy  that  is  one,  if 𝑡 follows  the  imple-
mentation of the CCSLF, and zero otherwise. We report these results
in Table  6.  For  all  measures  of  market  functioning,  the  coefficient
for  the  interaction  term 𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡 × 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 has  the  opposite  sign  to
that for 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 , and is significant at the 5% or 1% level. For a given
level of bond holdings by the central bank, scarcity is lower if mar-
ket participants can ease it by borrowing bonds against cash: lower
scarcity results in an improved arbitrage mechanism, hedging ability,
and market efficiency.

The coefficients for 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡 are nearly double their counterparts in
Table 5 in both magnitude and statistical significance, suggesting that
we underestimated the effect of scarcity when we analyzed jointly the
pre- and post-CCSLF periods. The sum of the parameter for 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵𝑖𝑡 and
its  interaction  with  the  CCSLF  dummy  is  different  from  zero  at  the
1%  level  only  for  Specification  5,  indicating  that  the  QE  purchases
contributed negatively to the price discovery process only prior to the
implementation of the CCSLF.

Consistently with the hypothesis that the implementation of the SFL
affected scarcity, we show in Table IA-6 of the Internet Appendix that
CCSLF improved market functioning by reducing the level and volatility
of repo specialness, easing arbitrageurs’ funding and carry costs.

5.2.  Balance sheet costs

A recent strand of the literature shows that balance sheet costs—
debt-overhang  and  bank  regulatory  requirements—imply  a  positive
benchmark return for arbitrage trades (e.g., Boyarchenko et al., 2018;
Du et al., 2018; Duffie, 2017; Andersen et al., 2019; Anderson et al.,
2021; Klingler and Sundaresan, 2023; Rime et al., 2021). In this section,
we show that accounting for the effect of balance sheet costs does not
diminish the role of scarcity in explaining the impediment to the price
discovery process.

Andersen et al. (2019) show that financial markets are not immune
to debt overhang considerations (Myers, 1977), whereby a company
(dealer) foregoes a positive-return project (trade) if the resulting profits
accrue primarily to debt- rather than equity-holders. They also show
that debt overhang increases a dealer’s required return on a balance-
sheet expanding trade proportionally to the dealer’s unsecured credit
spread. Funding-value adjustments aimed at reducing debt-overhang by
aligning the incentives between equity-holders and traders can, thus,
contribute to impeding the price discovery process.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400414L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 6
Scarcity  and  the  securities  lending  facility:  This  table  shows  the  results  for  the
regression of measures of interest rate market functioning on a measure of QE-driven
scarcity, interacted with an exogenous policy shock. The dependent variables are
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, the difference in pricing between sovereign futures contracts and underlying
bonds, 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡, the daily, 1-min return correlation between a futures contract and an
equally weighted portfolio of deliverable bonds, and 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, that is 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 net
of trading and security-borrowing costs. The main explanatory variable is 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 ,
the fraction of bonds held at the ECB, interacted with 𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡, a dummy that is
one after the ECB implemented a cash-collateralized securities lending facility, and
zero  otherwise.  We  control  for  the  nationality  of  the  contract,  with  the  dummy
variable 𝐷 𝐸𝑖, and deterministic year-end and quarter-end effects. We control for
frictions to the arbitrage process, that is the CTD bond’s bid–ask spread, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡 and
specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡. We proxy for the cost of carry using the slope of the repo
specialness term structure, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡, calculated as the difference between
the average specialness for trades with a term of five days or longer and the average
specialness for over-night trades, for all repo transactions of country 𝑖 on day 𝑡,
and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡, the difference between the 75th and the 25th percentile of
CTD bond repo specialness. We capture the quality option embedded in the futures
contract with the volatility of the return differential between first and second CTD
bond 𝜎12𝑖𝑡 and their price ratio 𝑃 12𝑖𝑡. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate that parameters are
significantly different from zero at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. Standard
errors are clustered at the delivery-country and date level. The sample extends from
January 2013 to September 2017, resulting in 1105 observations each for the two
countries we consider, Germany and Italy. Bond (futures) data are from MTS (Eurex).
Data on the European general collateral rates are from Bloomberg.

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡 × 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡

𝐷 𝐸𝑖

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝜎12𝑖𝑡

𝑃 12𝑖𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

(1)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡

(2)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡

(3)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡

(4)
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡

0.060∗∗∗ −0.382∗∗∗
(7.987)
−0.088∗∗∗
(−4.284)

(−2.991)
0.327∗∗
(2.688)
0.011∗∗∗ −0.021
(3.217)
(−1.552)
0.003∗∗∗
(5.194)

0.073∗∗∗

(10.331)

0.044∗∗∗ −0.371∗∗∗
(6.047)
−0.078∗∗∗
(−5.577)

(−3.007)
0.314∗∗
(2.432)
0.010∗∗∗ −0.018
(3.883)
(−1.218)
0.003∗∗∗
(4.896)
0.015∗∗
(2.145)
0.004∗∗
(2.645)
0.009∗
(2.020)

0.071∗∗∗
(8.242)
−0.046
(−0.506)
−0.003
(−0.619)
0.002
(0.098)

0.002
(1.112)
0.000
(0.229)

−0.013
(−1.444)
0.003
(0.970)

0.646
2209

0.595
2195

−0.001
(−1.251)
0.000
(−0.693)
0.001
(0.963)
0.017
(1.244)

0.727
2165

−0.011
(−1.002)
0.003
(0.983)

0.596
2194

(5)
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
0.027∗∗∗
(3.680)
−0.057∗∗∗
(−5.630)

0.006∗∗∗
(4.922)
0.003∗∗∗
(5.088)

0.008∗∗
(2.345)
0.005∗∗∗
(3.565)
−0.002∗∗
(−2.651)
0.001∗∗
(2.358)
−0.002
(−1.544)
0.019
(1.308)

0.303
1776

To verify whether the debt overhang channel is at play, we replicate
Specification 3 of Table 6 and include as regressors two economy-wide
rates,  the  3-month  Euribor  rate  and  the  10-year  Germany  yield,  to
capture changes in the short- and long-end of the risk-free rate curve,
and two measures of corporate credit spread, the 5-year iTraxx Europe
Senior Financials CDS index (Duffie, 2017) and the 5-year yield of an
average European AAA Covered Bond. As shown in Specification 1 of
Table 7, we find little support that the debt overhang channel played
a significant role in the event of the market inefficiency we study.14

An alternative source of increasing returns on balance-sheet expand-
ing  trades,  separate  and  incremental  to  the  effect  of  debt-overhang,
is capital regulation. As Duffie (2017) points out and as we detail in

14 We  include  rates  and  spread  variables  in  changes,  as  they  are  non-
stationary. As we show in Section 5.4, the dependent variables are stationary
and our analyses are robust to alternative dynamics specifications.

Table 7
Robustness:  Balance  sheet  costs:  This  table  shows  the
results  for  the  regression  of  measures  of  interest  rate
market functioning on a measure of QE-driven scarcity.
The dependent variable is 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, the difference in pric-
ing between sovereign futures contracts and underlying
bonds,  for  country-𝑖 on  day-𝑡.  The  main  explanatory
variable  is 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 ,  the  fraction  of  bonds  held  at  the
ECB,  interacted  with 𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡,  a  dummy  that  is  one
after the ECB implemented a cash-collateralized securities
lending facility, and zero otherwise. We test alternative
drivers of the basis measures: the 3-month Euribor rate,
𝐸 𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡; the interpolated 10-year yield for a generic
German Bund, 10𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡; the 5-year node of the iTraxx
Europe Senior Financials CDS index, 𝐼 𝐺 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑆 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡; the
5-year  spread  of  the  AAA  Covered  Bond  yield  curve
over the German treasury, 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑝𝑆 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡; the median
leverage  ratio  (LR)  for  European  globally  systemically
important banks, 𝑅𝑒𝑔 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡; the term-of-the-year premium
based on Euribor futures, 𝑇 𝑜𝑇 𝑌 𝑃𝑡. Similarly to Table 6,
we  also  control  for:  the  nationality  of  the  contract,
with the dummy variable 𝐷 𝐸𝑖; the CTD bond’s bid–ask
spread, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡; its specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡; the difference
between the 75th and the 25th percentile of CTD bond
repo specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡. Finally, we include
deterministic  year-end  and  quarter-end  effects  and,  to
control for the quality option, the volatility of the return
differential  between  first  and  second  CTD  bond, 𝜎12𝑖𝑡;
and  their  price  ratio 𝑃 12𝑖𝑡. ∗, ∗∗,  and ∗∗∗ indicate  that
parameters  are  significantly  different  from  zero  at  the
10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. Standard errors are
clustered  at  the  delivery-country  and  date  level.  The
sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017,
resulting in 1105 observations each for the two countries
we  consider,  Germany  and  Italy.  Bond  (futures)  data
are  from  MTS  (Eurex).  Data  on  the  European  general
collateral rates are from Bloomberg.

(1)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡

(2)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡

(3)
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡 × 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡

𝐷 𝐸𝑖

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡

𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝜎12𝑖𝑡

𝑃 12𝑖𝑡

𝛥𝐸 𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡

𝛥10𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡

𝛥𝐼 𝐺 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑆 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡

𝛥𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑝𝑆 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡

𝑅𝑒𝑔 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡

𝑇 𝑜𝑇 𝑌 𝑃𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

0.038∗∗∗
0.043∗∗∗
(5.890)
(4.781)
−0.077∗∗∗ −0.075∗∗∗ −0.074∗∗∗
(−5.397)
(−5.648)

0.040∗∗∗
(5.108)

(−5.478)

0.009∗∗∗
(3.861)
0.003∗∗∗
(4.930)
0.014∗∗
(2.171)
0.005∗∗
(2.625)
0.008∗
(1.902)
−0.001
(−1.373)
0.000
(−0.575)
0.001
(1.316)
0.028∗
(1.918)

0.010∗∗∗
(4.068)
0.003∗∗∗
(4.971)
0.014∗∗
(2.229)
0.005∗∗
(2.588)
0.008∗∗
(2.026)
−0.001
(−1.262)
0.000
(−0.715)
0.001
(1.187)
0.025
(1.646)

0.009∗∗∗
(3.904)
0.003∗∗∗
(4.715)
0.014∗∗
(2.085)
0.005∗∗
(2.659)
0.008∗
(1.870)
−0.001
(−0.531)
0.000
(−0.702)
0.001
(1.024)
0.018
(1.230)
0.019
(0.914)
−0.001
(−0.700)
−0.246∗
(−1.695)
0.005
(1.202)

0.001∗∗
(2.023)

0.723
2115

0.732
2165

−0.158
(−1.602)

0.730
2165

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400415L. Pelizzon et al.

.

Section  IA.5  of  the  Internet  Appendix,  the  Basel  III–mandated  ratio
most likely to affect the basis is the non-risk-based leverage ratio (LR),
which is obtained by dividing a bank’s Tier 1 capital by the sum of
its on-balance sheet exposures, derivative exposures, securities finance
transaction exposures, and off-balance sheet items (BIS, 2014), LR =
Tier 1 Capital
Exposure
The  LR  affects  participants’  ability  to  both  intermediate  and  en-
gage in a cash-futures basis trade only because of the effect of repo
transactions:  A  futures  transaction  increases  the  bank’s  exposure  by
the sum of the ‘‘current exposure’’, or replacement value of the posi-
tion, and the ‘‘potential future exposure’’ (Haynes and McPhail, 2021;
Boyarchenko et al., 2018) and both exposures are zero for short-term,
cleared,  interest  rate  derivatives.15 Repo  transactions,  instead,  affect
the denominator of the LR, by increasing a bank’s ‘‘securities financing
transaction exposure’’ by the full notional amount of the trade, while
reverse repos—whereby the bank borrows the security—do not.16 If a
bank intermediates a futures-bond basis trade for a client, it engages
in both repo and reverse repo, increasing its exposure by the notional
amount of the repo. If a trader (bank or otherwise) engages in this
trade, it borrows a bond via reverse repo, which constitutes a repo for
its bank counterpart.

In Figure IA-11 of the Internet Appendix, we plot the median LR
for a set of European global systemically important banks. As banks
gradually  increased  compliance  with  Basel  III,  they  began  to  hold
more  capital  against  their  exposure,  and  LR  increased  from  3%  in
2013 to 5% in 2016. Similarly to our results on balance sheet costs,
the LR series highlights that Basel III regulation alone cannot explain
the  price  discovery  process  dynamics  we  document,  given  that  the
banks’  leverage  is  nearly  constant  between  2016  and  2017,  yet  we
observe significant variation in the price discovery process, a worsening
throughout 2016, followed by an improvement when the CCSLF was
implemented.  We  include  the  median  LR  as  a  measure  of  capital
constraints  in  Specification  2  of Table  7 and,  while  significant,  the
inclusion of regulatory costs does not diminish the role of scarcity.

Finally, to rule out the possibility that the dynamics we observe
for  the  futures-bond  basis  are  driven  by  time-varying  balance  sheet
costs that we may not fully capture with the proxies in Table 7, we
calculate the turn-of-the-year premium in Euribor rates. This measure,
developed  by Fleckenstein  and  Longstaff (2020)  for  the  US  market,
captures intermediary balance sheet usage. Futures contracts on Euri-
bor rates with December expirations should price that the underlying
Euribor  loan  is  to  remain  on  the  balance  sheet  at  year-end,  while
loans underlying the neighboring contracts with March and September
expirations would not. Financing rates tend to spike near the end of
the year, as financial institutions face additional balance-sheet-related
pressures. The expected size of the year-end spike in Euribor reflected

15 For cleared, marked-to-market derivatives, the current exposure is zero.
The potential future exposure is calculated as PFE = (0.4 + 0.6 ⋅ NGR) ⋅ 𝐴Gross,
is  the  notional  amount  of  the  derivative  position  multiplied
where 𝐴Gross
by a conversion factor that varies according to the nature of its underlying
asset (BIS, 2014). The conversion factor for interest rate derivatives with a
remaining maturity of less than a year is 0%; hence, both the current exposure
and the potential future exposure (PFE) are zero, due to the short maturity of
the futures contract we consider. For the sake of simplicity, we ignore the
secondary effects of funding costs and leverage consequences of haircuts in
the repo transactions and initial margins for the futures contracts.
16 The  asymmetry  in  the  treatment  of  repo  transactions  follows  from
accounting  standards.  The  cash  borrower’s  leverage  increases,  in  line
with  their  liabilities.  The  cash-lender’s  total  assets  do  not  change,  even
though  the  compositions  shifts  in  favor  of  securities,  and  neither  does
their  liability,  as  the  security  provided  as  collateral  remain  in  the  balance
sheet  of  the  cash  borrower,  who  will  eventually  re-obtain  control  (see
https://www.icmagroup.org/market-practice-and-regulatory-policy/repo-
and-collateral-markets/icma-ercc-publications/frequently-asked-questions-
on-repo/37-is-repo-used-to-remove-assets-from-the-balance-sheet/).

in futures contracts constitutes a measure of the intermediaries’ balance
sheet costs faced by institutions.

Following Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020), we calculate the mea-
sure  as  the  average  difference  between  the  implied  Euribor  rate  for
the December-deliveries and the neighboring March- and September-
deliveries. We show the measures in Fig. 8.17 This market-based mea-
sure indicates that balance-sheet costs did not increase during QE, but
in fact decreased slightly. We include the turn-of-the-year premium as
regressor in Specification 3 of Table 7 and find that it is not significant.
The evidence in this section suggests that trading and funding costs
generated by market participants’ demand for intermediaries balance-
sheet space cannot explain the disconnect we observe between cash
bond and derivatives markets.

5.3.  Counterfactual evidence: Put-call parity for options on futures

To  further  support  our  hypothesis  that  QE-driven  scarcity  is  the
main driver behind the reduction in price discovery, we consider the
counterfactual of the put–call parity relation between treasury bond
futures and the put and call options written on the futures contracts:
Since none of the legs of this trade involves scarce cash assets, but only
derivative securities, we expect to find no incremental deviation in the
put–call parity during the QE period.

We calculate deviations from put–call parity as

𝑃 𝑢𝑡𝐶 𝑎𝑙 𝑙 𝑃 𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑘,𝑡,𝑇 =

(

̂𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 )
⏟⏟⏟
Option-Implied Futures Price

−

𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 )
⏟⏟⏟
Traded Futures Price

)

⋅ 𝑒−𝑟𝑡⋅(𝑇 −𝑡),

(10)

the  discounted  difference  between  the  option-implied  futures  price
̂𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 ) = 𝑒𝑟𝑡⋅(𝑇 −𝑡) (𝑐(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 ) − 𝑝(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 )) + 𝑘 and the corresponding traded
price, 𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 ), where 𝑐(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 ) (𝑝(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 )) is the price at time 𝑡 of a call
(put) option with expiry date 𝑇 and strike price 𝑘 written on a futures
contract with delivery date 𝑇 and price 𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 ). 𝑟𝑡 is the risk-free rate.
A positive 𝑃 𝑢𝑡𝐶 𝑎𝑙 𝑙 𝑃 𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑘,𝑡,𝑇 means that the synthetic futures contract
is more expensive that its traded counterpart.

We  obtain  transaction  data  for  options  on  treasury  futures  from
Eurex. Our calculations include only options on the German futures,
since  options  on  the  Italian  futures  contract  were  launched  only  in
October 2017. We match put- and call-option transactions if they share
both delivery date and strike price and they take place in the same
trading minute. We restrict our analysis to options that expire on the
same  day  as  the  next  futures  contract’s  delivery  date  and  that  are
near the money, i.e., with a strike price up to e1.5 from the at-the-
money option. Using the contemporaneous futures price, we calculate
𝑃 𝑢𝑡𝐶 𝑎𝑙 𝑙 𝑃 𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑘,𝑡,𝑇 for  a e100  notional  amount,  scale  it  by  time-to-
exercise  (or,  equivalently,  time-to-delivery)  and  aggregate  it  into  a
daily series. We use the Eonia rate as the risk-free rate.

We report the series in Fig. 9. The series is narrowly centered around
zero,  and  does  not  share  the  dynamics  of 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡,  also  reported  in
the  figure.  Consistent  with  our  expectations,  we  find  that  the  price
discovery process between assets in the put–call parity trade was not
affected by QE purchases. Since options and futures were not made
scarce by the QE purchases, this finding is consistent with scarcity being
the channel through which QE affected the price discovery process in
the market for European interest rates.

5.4.  Robustness

In this section, we show that our results are robust to alternative em-
pirical specifications. First, we demonstrate that endogeneity between

17 Figure  IA-12  shows  the  time-series  of  the  measure  from  1999,  when
Euribor futures were introduced.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400416L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 8. Turn-of-the-Year premium: This figure shows the time series of the turn-of-the-year premium. The premium is calculated as the average difference between the Euribor
rates implied from December-deliveries futures and the average rate implied by the neighboring September- and March-delivery contracts. Euribor futures data are obtained from
Bloomberg. Our data cover the January 2013–September 2017 period.

Fig.  9. Put-call  parity  for  options  on  bund  futures:  This  figure  shows  the  time  series  of  the  deviations  from  the  put–call  parity  for  Bund  futures  options,  defined  as
𝑃 𝑢𝑡𝐶 𝑎𝑙 𝑙 𝑃 𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑘,𝑡,𝑇 = ( ̂𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 ) − 𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 )) ⋅ 𝑒−𝑟𝑡 ⋅(𝑇 −𝑡), the discounted difference between the option-implied futures price ̂𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 ) = 𝑒𝑟𝑡 ⋅(𝑇 −𝑡) (𝑐(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 ) − 𝑝(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 )) + 𝑘 and the corresponding
traded price, 𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 ), where 𝑐(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 ) (𝑝(𝑘, 𝑡, 𝑇 )) is the price at time 𝑡 of a call (put) option with expiry date 𝑇 and strike price 𝑘 written on a futures contract with delivery date 𝑇
and price 𝐹 (𝑡, 𝑇 ). 𝑟𝑡 is the risk-free rate. We express the deviations as annualized returns. We match each trade of a call option with a transaction of a put option with the same
delivery date and strike price, if the two trades took place within the same minute of a given trading day. We only consider options for which the expiry day is the same as the
delivery date of the underlying futures contract. We aggregate the mispricing observations to create a daily put–call parity average deviation series. We report 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 for Germany,
for reference. We obtain data for Bund futures option from Eurex. The sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017. The QE period when the ECB was purchasing bonds
is shaded in gray and starts in March 2015.

purchases amount and measures of market functioning is not a signif-
icant concern; second, we show that market functioning and friction
variables do not exhibit non-stationarity and that our specifications are
robust to allowing for richer dynamics.

If  central  banks  conditioned  their  decision  on  whether  or  how
intensely to engage in quantitative easing on market functioning, our
analyses could suffer from endogeneity. We believe such risk is mini-
mal, given that the rate of purchases does not vary considerably over
time and that the allocation of purchases within Euro-zone countries is
dictated by fixed capital keys. However, we can address the concern di-
rectly by using the instrumental variable approach developed by Koijen
et al. (2021). They address the endogeneity between bond yields and
investors’ demand by developing an instrument for shocks to the Eu-
rozone treasury supply, based on the ECB’s policy announcements and
capital keys.

Every quarter, they calculate the total amount of bonds that, by the
end of QE, will be held at the ECB, based on the most recent announce-
ment by the central bank. Estimations are revised as the overall size or
duration of the program are updated. The total amount is then allocated

across Euro-zone countries based on the ECB’s capital keys. This ap-
proach allows us to circumvent the contemporaneity concern between
purchases and market functioning, as purchases are announced well in
advanced of the observed market functionig measures and allocation
across countries is based on rules pre-dating the QE implementation.18
Figure IA-13 of the Internet Appendix shows the estimated series of
maximum expected bond holdings by the ECB. We repeat the analysis
in Tables 5 and 6 and instrument (replace) 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 with the instrumental
variable ̂𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 developed by Koijen et al. (2021). We report the results
of the instrumental variable (reduced form) estimation in Table IA-7
(IA-8) of the Internet Appendix. Comparing the instrumental variable
results in Table IA-7 with the baseline shows that the parameters are
vastly unchanged, in both magnitude and statistical significant. Thus,
we find little support for potential endogeneity concerns, in our setting.

18 We thank Benoît Nguyen for the data, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen for
suggesting this analysis.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400417L. Pelizzon et al.

A second robustness check we conduct is to verify the stationarity of
the variables of interest, as regressions including unit roots can lead to
spurious results. Given that for any stationary process there exist a unit
root process that is impossible to distinguish from the stationary rep-
resentation (Hamilton, 1994, p. 445), we perform Dickey–Fuller tests
for the presence of unit roots, following Choi (2001) to accommodate
the panel data structure. At the bottom of Tables IA-9 and IA-10 of the
Internet Appendix we report the results for the variables representing
trading and funding frictions, and market efficiency, respectively. All
tests reject the null hypothesis of presence of a unit root.

Finally, we want to ensure that our conclusions are robust to ac-
counting for autocorrelation. In Table IA-9 of the Internet Appendix
we replicate the analysis from Tables 2, 3, and 4, including the lagged
dependent  variable  as  regressor.  We  do  the  same  with Table  5 and
report  the  results  in  Panels  A  and  B  of  Table  IA-10  of  the  Internet
Appendix, where we include the frictions as regressors in the latter,
but not the former. While the point-estimate may differ from the earlier
analyses, the statistical significance of the variable of interest is mostly
unchanged.

6.  Term-structure and swap spread arbitrage

In the previous sections, we focused narrowly on the pricing relation
between bond and futures to document the effect of QE on the interest
rate  price-discovery  process.  However,  any  other  arbitrage  relation
involving  sovereign  bonds  would  also  be  affected  by  the  worsening
of the frictions shown in Section 4. In this section, we show that our
results hold more generally by considering the two strategies among
the fixed-income arbitrages detailed in Duarte et al. (2007) that are
applicable to the treasury market: the term structure and swap spread
arbitrage.

To profit from a relative mispricing in the term structure, an ar-
bitrageur  would  buy  underpriced  bonds  and  sell  overpriced  bonds,
incurring  transaction  and  funding  costs.  We  then  need  to  establish
that the trading frictions we identified worsened for the average bond,
not just the CTD, as QE purchases targeted all treasuries. We repeat
the  analyses  from Tables  2, 3,  and 4 in  a  sample  that  includes  all
204 Italian and German long-term, coupon-bearing bonds. To account
for bond-invariant characteristics, we include bond-fixed effects. We
cluster standard errors two-way, by bond and date. Table 8 shows that
market and funding illiquidity worsened for all bonds, not just the CTD,
when their scarcity increased.

To quantify the inefficient functioning within the bond market, we
fit a Nelson–Siegel model for each day in our sample, and calculate the
root mean squared distance between the average daily market yields
and the model-implied yields (the noise measure in Hu et al., 2013). For
the swap spread arbitrage, we report the difference between the spread
of  a  5-year  Eonia  swap  and  the  5-year  yield  from  the  interpolated
German curve.19 As with 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, our objective here is not to capture
arbitrage profits, but rather to focus on the effect of the increase in
frictions that followed QE.

We report the daily term-structure noise and swap spread measures
in Fig. 10. Similar to the futures-bond example, these alternative mar-
ket functioning measures increased during the QE period, as scarcity
contributed to the collateral value of treasuries, and decrease as market
participants resorted to the CCSLF. In Table 9, we repeat the analyses
in Table 6 using these variables, finding similar evidence. While an in-
depth analysis of these alternative trades is beyond the scope of this
paper, the results in this section offer an example of the far-reaching
consequences of QE on the price discovery process for interest rates.

19 For the swap spread, we focus on the German curve, to limit the sovereign
credit risk in the strategy. The same concern does not apply to a term-structure
play, as it would have a net zero credit exposure.

Table 8
Quantitative  easing  effects  on  trading  and  shorting  costs:  This
table shows the results for the regression of trading and shorting
costs on the fraction of bonds of that country that are held at the
ECB, 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 , for a sample including all coupon-bearing Treasury
bonds issued by Germany and Italy. The dependent variable in
Specifications 1 is the bid–ask spread for bond 𝑖 on day 𝑡, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡;
the  dependent  variable  in  Specification  2  is  the  bond’s  repo
specialness, 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡,  calculated  as  the  difference  between
the  European  general  collateral  repo  rate  and  the  transaction
volume-weighted special repo rate for 𝑖 on day 𝑡; the dependent
variable in Specification 3 is 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡, the interquartile
spread  in  the  distribution  of  specialness  for  repo  transactions
involving  bond 𝑖 on  day 𝑡.  We  include  bond-fixed  effects  in
all  specifications.  We  control  for:  the  volatility  of  the  bond
returns, 𝜎𝑖𝑡; the bond’s traded volume, 𝑉 𝑜𝑙 𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑡, in billions; year-
and quarter-end dummies; and the bond’s bid–ask spread, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡.
We indicate the statistical significance of the parameters by ∗,
∗∗, and ∗∗∗, if they are significantly different from zero at the
10%,  5%,  or  1%  level,  respectively.  Standard  errors  are  two-
way clustered at the bond and day level. The sample is based
on high-frequency quotes from 148,630 bond-days in our sample
for the two countries, Germany and Italy, from January 2013 to
September 2017. Bond price data and bond characteristics are
obtained from MTS. Repo transactions data are provided by the
MTS Group and BrokerTec.

(1)
𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡
0.498∗∗∗
(7.744)
0.112∗∗∗

(18.599)
−0.172∗∗∗
(−9.025)

0.070∗∗∗
(7.272)
−0.004
(−1.159)

0.826
148 630
Yes

(2)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡
0.971∗∗∗

(15.078)

0.016∗∗∗
(3.796)

0.004
(0.187)
0.079∗∗∗
(4.065)
0.006
(0.681)

0.581
148 630
Yes

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝜎𝑖𝑡

𝑉 𝑜𝑙 𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑡

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs
Bond FE

(3)
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡

0.129∗∗∗
(9.087)
0.004∗∗∗
(4.161)

0.004
(0.830)
0.028∗∗∗
(3.328)
0.018∗∗∗
(5.881)

0.216
148 630
Yes

7.  Discussion

In the previous sections, we show that the ECB’s purchases of trea-
suries impaired market quality by making these bonds unavailable, thus
reducing their market float. Large purchases of treasuries, however, are
not unique to central banks, as buy-and-hold investors such as pension
funds and insurance companies similarly hold them in large amounts
and for long investment horizons (Fang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023;
Eren et al., 2023). This begs the question of what makes QE purchases
by the central bank unique. There are at least three reasons why we
would not expect the same results to occur had the purchases been
made by other long-horizon investors.

First, the ECB’s approach to securities lending, prior to the CCSLF,
is unique among buy-and-hold investors. Unlike the ECB, other buy-
and-hold investors like pension funds and insurance companies actively
lend out their holdings. Since lending securities (against cash) decreases
scarcity, we would not expect to observe the same disruption in market
functioning if large purchases were conducted by other buy-and-hold
investors, who consistently engage in securities lending.20

20 The extant literature shows that buy-and-hold investors are quite active
in the market for securities lending. The International Security Lending Orga-
nization (2021) reports that 28% of all securities on loan are lent by pension
funds and insurance companies. Similarly, Foley-Fisher et al. (2019) show that
the vast majority of (corporate) bond lending originates from the holdings
of insurance companies and pension funds, for whom securities lending is a

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400418L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 10. Cross-maturity mispricing and the swap spread: This figure shows the time series of a measure of arbitrage opportunities across bonds of different maturities, for the
German and Italian market, in red and blue, respectively (left y-axis). This measure corresponds to ‘‘noise’’ measure developed by Hu et al. (2013), which we calculate by fitting
a Nelson–Siegel model to each day in our sample, and calculating the root mean squared distance between the average daily market yields and the model-implied yields. Similar
to Hu et al. (2013), while we fit the model on every bond with more than one month to maturity, we calculate the noise measure only based on bonds with more than one
year to maturity. We also plot the interest rate swap-Treasury spread, calculated as the 5-year spread for an EONIA-based swap and the corresponding constant-maturity yield of
a hypothetical bond issued by Germany (right y-axis). We obtain 1105 observations for each country, based on a total universe of 164 bonds, or about 44 bonds on average per
country/day. Bond data are obtained from the MTS group. Our sample extends from January 2013 to September 2017. The QE period when the ECB was purchasing bonds is
shaded in gray and starts in March 2015.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 9
Quantitative  easing  effects  on  fixed-income  arbitrages:  This
table  shows  the  results  for  the  regression  of  fixed-income
arbitrage  bases  on  the  fraction  of  bonds  of  that  country
that are held at the ECB, 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 . The dependent variable in
Specifications 1 and 2 is the ‘‘noise’’ measure developed by
Hu  et  al. (2013),  which  we  calculate  by  fitting  a  Nelson–
Siegel model to each day in our sample, and calculating the
root mean squared distance between the average daily market
yields  and  the  model-implied  yields.  Similar  to Hu  et  al.
(2013),  while  we  fit  the  model  on  every  bond  with  more
than one month to maturity, we calculate the noise measure
only based on bonds with more than one year to maturity.
The dependent variable in Specification 3 is the interest rate
swap-Treasury spread, calculated as the 5-year spread for an
EONIA-based  swap  and  the  corresponding  constant-maturity
yield  of  a  hypothetical  bond  issued  by  Germany.  The  main
explanatory variable is 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 , the fraction of bonds held at
the ECB, interacted with 𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡, a dummy that is one after
the ECB implemented a cash-collateralized securities lending
facility,  and  zero  otherwise.  Specification  1  and  3  (2)  use
German (Italian) data. We indicate the statistical significance
of the parameters by ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗, if they are significantly
different from zero at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively.
Standard errors clustered at the futures delivery level. The data
sample covers the January 2013 to September 2017 period.
Bond price data and bond characteristics are obtained from
MTS. Interest rate swap data are obtained from Bloomberg.

𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡 × 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%

𝑖𝑡

𝐶 𝐶 𝑆 𝐿𝐹𝑡

𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐸 𝑛𝑑𝑡

Adj. R2
Obs

(1)
𝑁 𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑡

(2)
𝑁 𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑡
0.002∗∗∗ −0.001
(19.643)
(−0.956)
−0.002∗∗∗ −0.002
(−0.563)
(−3.542)
0.000∗∗
0.000
(1.107)
(2.372)
0.000
0.000
(−1.703)
(1.180)
0.000
0.000
(−0.131)
(1.456)

0.877
1105

0.101
1104

(3)
𝑆 𝑤𝑎𝑝𝑆 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑡
0.948∗∗∗
(4.139)
−1.740∗∗∗
(−3.642)

0.429∗∗∗
(5.070)
−0.033
(−0.840)
0.010
(1.680)

0.770
1092

Second, a significant share of the assets held by the ECB was, in fact,
purchased from other buy-and-hold investors. To show this, we obtain
data  from  the  ECB’s  Government  Finance  Statistics  dataset,  which
details  the  holder  composition  of  the  aggregate  European  sovereign
bond market. We plot the holdings data in Figure IA-14 of the Internet
Appendix for Germany in Panel (a), Italy in Panel (b), and in aggregate
those for the Eurozone in Panel (c). The data show that holdings were
virtually unchanged across investors for the European sovereign bond
market, from 2006 up to 2015. During the QE period, however, the
market experienced significant transfers between holder types, mostly
from foreign investors—who are considered buy-and-hold or ‘‘inelastic’’
investors, together with insurance companies and pension funds—to
the ECB (Arrata et al., 2020; Koijen et al., 2021).

Third, unlike other investors, the ECB lacks a profit motive, which
impacts its purchase strategy in two ways. First, the central bank is
required to purchase a fairly rigid combination of bonds (dictated by
the member countries’ populations and size, and, within each coun-
try, by its outstanding debt maturity composition), regardless of how
expensive  or  special  they  are.  Unlike  the  ECB,  insurance  companies
and other buy-and-hold institutions are price-sensitive: For example,
an insurance company can decide not to purchase a security that is
highly sought after on the repo market, or is overpriced in their view,
as it can easily obtain a similar exposure and regulatory alleviation
by purchasing a cheaper close substitute. The ECB, on the other hand,
needs to abide by an exogenously-given mandate, resulting in purchases
of even very special bonds, which contributes to further increasing their
specialness and, thus, worsening overall market functioning. A second
channel through which the lack of a profit motive may contribute to
our findings relates again to the securities lending market. Insurance
companies and other similar investors would not forego the potential
additional profit from securities lending, and would thus make their
portfolios potentially available to the market. The central bank, on the
other hand, is not driven by profit and accordingly decided not to lend
out its securities in the regime before the implementation of the CCSLF.
The  easing  of  scarcity  that  followed  the  implementation  of  the
CCSLF shows that the central bank already possesses an effective tool to
improve market functioning. The policy recommendation that follows

potential source of wholesale funding that allows them to boost the overall

return on their asset portfolio (Foley-Fisher et al., 2016).

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400419L. Pelizzon et al.

Table A.1
Cheapest-to-deliver bonds: This table reports, per each contract delivery and country in our sample, the
International Securities Identification Number (ISIN) of the bond we identify as the cheapest to deliver. We
report the frequency, in percentage terms of trading minutes per contract, for which the bond was the actual
CTD (% CTD). We report the percentage of physically settled contracts that were settled with the bond we
identify as the CTD (% of Delivered). Data on bond prices and repo rates employed to calculate the frequency
of the CTD status of bonds are obtained from the MTS group and BrokerTec. Data on the prices of futures
contracts and the fraction of physically settled contracts are obtained from Eurex.

Delivery

201303
201306
201309
201312
201403
201406
201409
201412
201503
201506
201509
201512
201603
201606
201609
201612
201703
201706
201709
201712

Average
Median

Bond

DE0001135465
DE0001135465
DE0001135473
DE0001135473
DE0001102309
DE0001102309
DE0001102325
DE0001102325
DE0001102333
DE0001102333
DE0001102358
DE0001102366
DE0001102374
DE0001102374
DE0001102382
DE0001102382
DE0001102390
DE0001102390
DE0001102408
DE0001102408

Germany
% CTD
99.924%
99.669%
99.901%
99.966%
99.926%
99.965%
83.059%
99.966%
99.654%
99.910%
99.816%
99.562%
99.808%
99.059%
98.619%
99.519%
99.855%
99.851%
99.962%
99.942%

98.897%
99.853%

% of delivered
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
99.934%
100.000%
99.751%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
99.389%
100.000%

99.954%
100.000%

Bond

IT0004848831
IT0004848831
IT0004848831
IT0004848831
IT0004848831
IT0004898034
IT0004898034
IT0004356843
IT0004953417
IT0004953417
IT0004513641
IT0004513641
IT0004513641
IT0004513641
IT0004644735
IT0004644735
IT0004644735
IT0004644735
IT0004889033
IT0004889033

IT
% CTD
99.801%
67.324%
98.535%
89.672%
99.808%
99.866%
99.894%
99.747%
99.532%
99.399%
98.873%
76.522%
99.657%
99.872%
99.895%
99.981%
99.935%
99.897%
99.893%
99.793%

96.395%
99.797%

% of delivered
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
77.664%
100.000%
98.753%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
19.908%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
99.978%

94.815%
100.000%

from our analysis is for the ECB to adjust the availability of safe asset
collateral on loan to improve market functioning as and when the need
arises. The adjustment can be achieved in several ways: by lending a
larger amount of its holdings, by increasing institution-specific security
borrowing limits, by improving the pricing of its facilities, or by allow-
ing non-banks to access the SLF. In sum, we propose that the central
bank consider securities lending as a second lever in its QE toolbox, one
aimed at containing the market quality costs that arise from the other
lever, outright market purchases.

While these additional policy measures would improve market func-
tioning, we doubt that they would affect markedly the main objective of
QE, i.e., the reduction of the term premium. First, scarcity is one of sev-
eral channels through which purchases affect bond prices (Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, 2013; Krishnamurthy et al., 2018): To the
extent that market functioning does not worsen through these other
channels, the central bank can impact yields while maintaining market
quality. Second, the discretion we recommend for the implementation
of securities lending means that the quantity of bonds lent via CCSLF
can be kept far lower than the amount held by the ECB, improving
market functioning while still allowing for safe assets to be somewhat
scarce. Facilities like the CCSLF allow the central bank to calibrate the
trade-off between pricing and market quality, and select the optimal
level of scarcity.

8.  Conclusions

differential between otherwise identical assets. We extend the analysis
to the term-structure and swap spread arbitrages and demonstrate that
other pricing relations that include treasuries are similarly disrupted.
As  a  conterfactual,  we  show  that  arbitrage  relations  involving  only
interest rates derivatives were as efficient before as after QE, since these
securities were not made scarce.

Our  findings  point  to  the  risk  of  market  inefficiency  and  imper-
fect monetary policy transmission across markets, supporting policy-
makers’  concerns  regarding  the  effect  they  have  on  price  discovery.
However,  we  show  that  the  exogenous  policy  change  that  allowed
market participants to borrow the securities held at the ECB against
cash provides an effective tool to modulate scarcity and restore market
efficiency.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Loriana Pelizzon: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cu-
ration, Conceptualization. Marti G. Subrahmanyam: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Davide Tomio: Writing –
review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Software,  Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Since the fallout from the Great Recession, central banks have rou-
tinely and successfully turned to Quantitative Easing (QE) to stimulate
the economy. We show that implementing these interventions involves
a  necessary  tension:  While  treasury  scarcity  reduces  their  yields,  it
impedes the price discovery process at play in the market for interest
rates.  It  increases  the  transaction,  funding,  and  carry  costs  involved
in  the  arbitrage  mechanisms  that  keep  interest  rates  aligned  across
markets.

Focusing on the relation between treasury bonds and futures, we
show  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  return  correlation  and  price

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  acknowledge  that  they  have  read  and  agree  to  the
JFE’s submission guidelines and disclosure policies. The authors have
no conflict of interest to disclose regarding the topics covered in this
study or the findings therein.

In previous years, Tomio received funding for scholarly work from
the  FRIC  Center  at  the  Copenhagen  Business  School,  the  Volkswa-
gen Foundation, and the Mayo Center for Asset Management at the
University of Virginia.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400420L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. A.1. Cheapest-to-deliver frequency, days to delivery, and yield: Panel A of this figure shows the frequency the bond we identify as CTD has the smallest basis at different
times during the life of the futures contract, averaged across all 20 contracts in our sample, and Panel B shows the yield to maturity of the bond we identify as CTD. We report
the amounts separately for Germany (in red) and Italy (in blue). To determine how often the bond we identify as CTD indeed has the smallest basis, we calculate the mispricing
for each deliverable bond in every trading minute in our sample, following Eq. (1), and identify the CTD bond for the whole contract. We report in Panel A the average frequency
with which CTD bonds had the smallest basis over the three-month life of the contracts. The sample we employ is based on high-frequency quotes from 1105 bond-days in our
sample for each of the two countries, Germany and Italy, from January 2013 to September 2017. Bond price data and bond characteristics are obtained from MTS and futures
data are obtained for the Eurex market via Thomson Reuters. Repo transactions data are provided by the MTS Group and BrokerTec. The QE period (i.e., when the ECB was
purchasing bonds) is shaded in gray in Panel B and starts in March 2015.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)

Appendix A.  Identification of the CTD bond

In  the  body  of  the  paper,  we  focus  the  bond-market  analysis  on
a  single  bond  per  country-day  (i.e.,  the  CTD  bond  that  the  short
futures position is most likely to deliver). We identify the CTD bond
for  each  contract  following  the  calculations  laid  out  in  Sections 2.3
and 3. That is, we calculate the mispricing between each bond and
the  corresponding  futures  contract  as  per  Eq.  (1),  for  every  trading
minute of the life of the contract, and designate as CTD the bond for
which the basis is smallest the majority of the time. While, in theory,
the  identity  of  the  CTD  bond  could  change  through  the  life  of  the
contract,  because  of  changes  in  the  shape  of  the  yield  curve,  or  in
the set of bonds eligible for delivery, such uncertainty is minimal in
the sample we consider. In Table A.1, we list the CTD bond per each
contract  in  our  sample,  and  show  the  percentage  of  minutes  in  the
three-month  contract  duration  that  the  bond  we  identify  as  CTD  is
indeed the cheapest among all deliverable bonds (% of CTD). We also
report the percentage of contracts that were physically settled with the
CTD bond (% of Delivered).

As  shown  in  the  table,  the  bond  we  identify  as  the  CTD  for  a
given contract is, on average, the one with the smallest basis 98.92%
(95.67%)  of  the  time  for  Germany  (Italy),  demonstrating  that  the
uncertainty  on  the  identity  of  the  CTD  was  insignificant.  Moreover,
when  the  short  futures  positions  holder  decides  to  physically  settle
their positions, they do so using the CTD bond 99.98% of the time for
Germany (93.90% for Italy). As the short position could deliver any
of the bonds in the deliverable basket, the fact that the CTD bond is
delivered in the overwhelming majority of cases further supports our
identification. This clear identification of the CTD bond also suggests
that  the  Bund  and  BTP  futures  markets  are  not  subject  to  squeeze
potential in the period we consider. Merrick et al. (2005) study the
strategic trading around the delivery date of bond futures for the UK/
Gilt market, and defines a full squeeze as the event that the CTD and the
next CTD bond have the same (adjusted) price. If a squeeze happened in
our sample, therefore, we should observe uncertainty as to the identity
of the CTD bond, which is not the case in our data.

To check whether the identity of the CTD bond is known to market
participants  at  the  time  of  trade  and  not  only  ex-post,  we  plot  the

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400421L. Pelizzon et al.

Table B.1
Descriptive statistics: This table shows the distribution of CTD bond-specific variables, together with
a host country-specific variables. Variables for Italian bonds are shown in Panel A. The corresponding
quantities for German bonds are shown in Panel B. 𝐵 𝐴𝑡 is the CTD bond bid–ask spread, in euros, 𝜎𝑖𝑡
is its return volatility, both based on observations sampled at a one-minute frequency. We calculate
a bond’s yield, 𝑌 𝑖𝑒𝑙 𝑑𝑡, from its average daily price, in percentage points. 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 is the CTD
bond  daily  volume-weighted  average  repo  rate  for  overnight  transactions,  in  percentage  points,
and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡 (𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡)  is  the  repo  specialness’s  interquartile  spread  (standard
deviation), also in percentage points. 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡 is the country-specific difference between
the average specialness for trades with a term of five days or longer and the average specialness for
over-night trades. The table also shows the distribution for country-specific variables, at the bottom
of each panel, such as the fraction of bonds held at the ECB as a result of its QE, 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 , and the
futures-bond basis 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, in percentage points, as in Eq. (1). We also the basis once trading and
funding costs are taken into consideration, 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡. 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 is the one-minute return correlation
between the futures contract and an equally-weighted portfolio of deliverable bonds. 𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡
is calculated as the repo rate such that that the forward bond price in Eq. (1) equals the futures
equivalent price. We subtract the ECB’s deposit facility rate, to account for discrete changes in
policy rates. Data on the ECB purchases were obtained from the ECB’s website, and the amounts of
sovereign bonds outstanding were obtained from the websites of national central banks. The sample
is based on high-frequency quotes from 1057 bond-days in our sample for each of the two countries,
Germany and Italy, from January 2013 to September 2017. Bond price data and bond characteristics
are obtained from MTS. Futures data are obtained for the Eurex market via Thomson Reuters. Repo
transactions data are provided by MTS and BrokerTec.

Panel A: Italy

Obs

Mean

Std

P5

P25

Median

P75

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡
𝜎𝑖𝑡
𝑌 𝑖𝑒𝑙 𝑑𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡
𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡
𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡
𝜎𝑖𝑡
𝑌 𝑖𝑒𝑙 𝑑𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡
𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 .𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡
𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡
𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡
𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

1104
1104
1104
1103
1103
1100
1092
1104
1104
1103
1097
1104

0.095
1.239
2.419
0.073
0.045
0.040
−0.020
0.035
0.001
−0.003
0.905
−0.043

Obs

Mean

1105
1105
1021
1105
1105
1104
714
1105
1105
1105
1098
1105

0.054
1.040
0.683
0.286
0.072
0.060
0.059
0.058
0.005
0.000
0.973
−0.388

0.048
0.690
1.159
−0.082
0.005
0.008
−0.071
0.000
−0.003
−0.011
0.815
−0.765

0.042
0.502
1.078
0.167
0.052
0.034
0.041
0.043
0.004
0.004
0.045
0.366
Panel B: Germany
Std

P5

0.070
0.907
1.521
−0.019
0.015
0.017
−0.041
0.000
−0.001
−0.006
0.883
−0.262

0.088
1.112
2.111
0.016
0.028
0.031
−0.022
0.010
0.000
−0.003
0.917
0.043

0.112
1.426
3.253
0.140
0.058
0.052
−0.002
0.067
0.004
−0.001
0.937
0.226

P25

Median

P75

0.022
0.305
0.602
0.367
0.148
0.120
0.106
0.072
0.004
0.003
0.017
0.406

0.033
0.688
−0.173
0.022
0.010
0.007
−0.072
0.000
0.001
−0.005
0.940
−1.160

0.042
0.842
0.157
0.068
0.020
0.019
−0.007
0.000
0.002
−0.002
0.967
−0.614

0.050
0.979
0.535
0.172
0.040
0.038
0.045
0.017
0.004
0.000
0.978
−0.303

0.058
1.158
1.279
0.442
0.090
0.075
0.103
0.111
0.007
0.001
0.985
−0.086

P95

0.160
2.208
4.384
0.361
0.135
0.102
0.043
0.119
0.010
0.002
0.957
0.411

P95

0.097
1.574
1.649
0.716
0.190
0.140
0.245
0.204
0.012
0.004
0.990
0.072

average frequency that the bond we identify as CTD has the smallest
basis at different times during the life of the futures contract in Panel
A of Fig. A.1. The graph shows that the CTD has the smallest basis
more than 95% of time, on average, already on the first day of trading
(i.e., when there are 90 days to delivery), confirming the minuscule
degree of uncertainty regarding the identity of the CTD.

The CTD bond is determined as the bond with the smallest basis.
Considering Eq. (1), it is clear that, everything else constant, the higher
the conversion factor of a bond, the lower the associated basis. Conver-
sion factors are calculated with complex formulas that can be found on
the Eurex website, but can be approximated with high precision as the
price the bond would have at delivery if the yield curve was flat at 6%,
scaled by its face value. If yields are below 6%, as is the case during the
period we consider, the conversion factor is higher, the smaller is the
duration of the CTD bond, to a first approximation. Conversely, if yields
are above 6%, the CTD bond will be that with the largest duration. It
follows that the likelihood of the CTD’s identity changing during the life
of the contract is the highest when bond yields are near 6%. Panel B of
Fig. A.1 shows the yield of the CTD bond in the period we consider. The
yields are, generally, far from 6%, confirming that the identity of the

CTD is known with certainty by market participants. The optionality
to deliver the cheapest bond, called the quality option, is priced in the
futures contract, and can be valued following standard option-pricing
models. While our calculations eschew the quantification of the value
of such an option, its value would be very small, given the low yield
level in relation to the 6% notional coupon, and as confirmed by the
extremely high fraction of time that the bond we identify as CTD is
indeed the CTD (i.e., the switching of the CTD status among deliverable
bonds is exceedingly rare).

Appendix B.  Descriptive statistics

In this section, we report the descriptive statistics of the variable we
employ in our analysis. Table B.1 shows the number of observations,
average, standard deviation, and fifth, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th per-
centiles of the left- and right-hand-side variables in our specifications
separately for Italy and Germany in Panels A and B, respectively. The
top part of each panel features CTD bond characteristics (such as its
yield to maturity, liquidity, and repo specialness), while the bottom
part of each panel shows measures of market efficiency (such as the

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400422L. Pelizzon et al.

basis,  1-min  correlation,  implied  repo  and  tradeable  basis)  and  the
aggregate amount of bonds held at the ECB per country, as a fraction
of their outstanding amount.

We  calculate  the  bonds’  best  bid  and  ask  prices,  and  the  corre-
sponding bid–ask spreads, at a one-minute frequency. We average the
spreads  at  a  daily  level  to  calculate  the  bonds’  illiquidity, 𝐵 𝐴𝑖𝑡,  in
euros,  and  we  use  the  midquote  to  calculate  the  daily  one-minute
return standard deviation, 𝜎𝑖𝑡, which we express in basis points. We
average the midquote throughout the day to calculate the bonds’ yield,
𝑌 𝑖𝑒𝑙 𝑑𝑖𝑡, in percentage points. In our analyses, we employ bond-specific
characteristics, such as the bond’s outstanding amount 𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖, in
billions of euros. Since the identity of the CTD bond varies between
contracts (see Table A.1 for the full list of CTD bonds by delivery),
the variable 𝐴𝑚𝑡𝐼 𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡 will change discretely as the CTD changes. We
calculate the volume of trading, 𝑉 𝑜𝑙 𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑡, as the amount traded on the
MTS platform for the CTD bond 𝑖 on day 𝑡, in billions of euros. We
show in Table B.1 the descriptive statistics for repo transactions on CTD
bonds. 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑡 is the transaction volume-weighted specialness for
overnight repo transactions on CTD bond 𝑖 on day 𝑡, calculated with
respect to the GC rate, in percentage points, while 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑡
is  the  interquartile  range  of  that  distribution,  in  percentage  points,
and 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡 is the corresponding standard deviation, also in
percentage points. 𝑆 𝑝𝑒𝑐 𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑆 𝑙 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑡 is the country-specific difference
between the average specialness for trades with a term of five days or
longer, and the average specialness for over-night trades, in percentage
points.

The bottom variables in the panel represent measures of interest rate
market functioning and bond scarcity: 𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡, 𝐶 𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡, 𝐼 𝑚𝑝𝑙 𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑡 and
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝐵 𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡 which are described in Sections 3 and 5. 𝐸 𝐶 𝐵%
𝑖𝑡 measures
the  fraction  of  bonds  held  at  the  ECB,  i.e.,  the  stock  of  purchases
divided by the outstanding debt amount.

Appendix C.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104004.

Data availability

Replication Code for Central Bank Driven Mispricing (Original data)
(Mendeley Data)

References

Adrian, T., Begalle, B., Copeland, A., Martin, A., 2013. Repo and securities lending. In:
Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling. University of Chicago Press,
pp. 131–148.

Amihud, Y., Mendelson, H., 1980. Dealership market: Market-making with inventory.

Andersen, L., Duffie, D., Song, Y., 2019. Funding value adjustments. J. Finance 74 (1),

J. Financ. Econ. 8 (1), 31–53.

145–192.

Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arrata, W., Nguyen, B., Rahmouni-Rousseau, I., Vari, M., 2020. The scarcity effect of
QE on repo rates: Evidence from the euro area. J. Financ. Econ. 137 (3), 837–856.
Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., 2016. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Q.

Ballensiefen, B., Ranaldo, A., Winterberg, H., 2023. Money market disconnect. Rev.

J. Econ. 131 (4), 1593–1636.

Financ. Stud. 36 (10), 4158–4189.

Bauer, M.D., Rudebusch, G.D., 2014. The signaling channel for Federal Reserve bond

purchases. Int. J. Central Bank. 10 (3), 233–289.

Bernanke,  B.,  2012.  Monetary  policy  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  In:  Speech  at
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium.  Jackson  Hole,
Wyoming.

BIS, 2014. Basel III Leverage Ratio Framework and Disclosure Requirements. Report by

the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.

Borio,  C.,  Zabai,  A.,  2018.  Unconventional  monetary  policies:  a  re-appraisal.  In:

Research Handbook on Central Banking. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Boyarchenko,  N.,  Eisenbach,  T.M.,  Gupta,  P.,  Shachar,  O.,  Van  Tassel,  P.,  2018.
Bank-Intermediated Arbitrage. Staff Report 858, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Boyle, P.P., 1989. The quality option and timing option in futures contracts. J. Finance

44 (1), 101–113.

Buraschi, A., Whelan, P., 2016. Bond markets and unconventional monetary policy. In:
Handbook of Fixed-Income Securities. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. 93–116.
Cenedese, G., Della Corte, P., Wang, T., 2021. Currency mispricing and dealer balance

sheets. J. Finance 76 (6), 2763–2803.

Chen, X., Sun, Z., Yao, T., Yu, T., 2023. In search of habitat. Rev. Asset Pricing Stud.

13 (2), 266–306.

Choi, I., 2001. Unit root tests for panel data. J. Int. Money Finance 20 (2), 249–272.
Christensen, J.H., Gillan, J.M., 2022. Does quantitative easing affect market liquidity? J.

Bank. Financ. 134, 106349.

Christensen, J.H., Rudebusch, G.D., 2012. The response of interest rates to US and UK

quantitative easing. Econ. J. 122 (564), 384–414.

Cœuré, B., 2015. Embarking on public sector asset purchases. In: Speech at the Second

International Conference on Sovereign Bond Markets.

Cœuré, B., 2017. Asset purchases, financial regulation and repo market activity. In:
Speech at the European Repo and Collateral Council Annual General Meeting.
Corradin, S., Maddaloni, A., 2020. The importance of being special: repo markets during

the crisis. J. Financ. Econ. 137 (2), 392–429.

D’Amico,  S.,  English,  W.,  López-Salido,  D.,  Nelson,  E.,  2012.  The  federal  reserve’s
large-scale asset purchase programmes: rationale and effects. Econ. J. 122 (564),
F415–F446.

D’Amico, S., Fan, R., Kitsul, Y., 2018. The scarcity value of treasury collateral: Repo-
market effects of security-specific supply and demand factors. J. Financ. Quant.
Anal. 53 (5), 2103–2129.

D’Amico, S., King, T.B., 2013. Flow and stock effects of large-scale treasury purchases:
Evidence on the importance of local supply. J. Financ. Econ. 108 (2), 425–448.
D’Amico, S., Pancost, N.A., 2022. Special repo rates and the cross-section of bond prices:
The role of the special collateral risk premium. Rev. Financ. 26 (1), 117–162.
De Pooter, M., Martin, R.F., Pruitt, S., 2018. The liquidity effects of official bond market

intervention. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 53 (1), 243–268.

De Roure, C., Moench, E., Pelizzon, L., Schneider, M., 2019. OTC discount. Available

At SSRN 3507679.

Driscoll, J.C., Kraay, A.C., 1998. Consistent covariance matrix estimation with spatially

dependent panel data. Rev. Econ. Stat. 80 (4), 549–560.

Du,  W.,  Hébert,  B.,  Huber,  A.W.,  2023.  Are  intermediary  constraints  priced?  Rev.

Du, W., Tepper, A., Verdelhan, A., 2018. Deviations from covered interest rate parity.

Financ. Stud. 36 (4), 1464–1507.

J. Finance 73 (3), 915–957.

Duarte, J., Longstaff, F.A., Yu, F., 2007. Risk and return in fixed-income arbitrage:

Nickels in front of a steamroller? Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (3), 769–811.

Duffie, D., 1996. Special repo rates. J. Finance 51 (2), 493–526.
Duffie, D., 2017. Post-Crisis Bank Regulations and Financial Market Liquidity. Banca

d’Italia.

73 (6), 1815–1847.

Duffie, D., Garleanu, N., Pedersen, L.H., 2005. Over-the-counter markets. Econometrica

Ehling, P., Gallmeyer, M., Heyerdahl-Larsen, C., Illeditsch, P., 2018. Disagreement about

inflation and the yield curve. J. Financ. Econ. 127 (3), 459–484.

Eisenschmidt, J., Ma, Y., Zhang, A.L., 2023. Monetary policy transmission in segmented

markets. J. Financ. Econ. 151, 103738.

Eren, E., Schrimpf, A., Xia, F.D., 2023. The demand for government debt. Available At

SSRN 4466154.

Eser, F., Schwaab, B., 2016. Evaluating the impact of unconventional monetary policy
measures:  Empirical  evidence  from  the  ECB’s  securities  markets  programme.  J.
Financ. Econ. 119 (1), 147–167.

Fang, X., Hardy, B., Lewis, K.K., 2022. Who Holds Sovereign Debt and Why It Matters.

Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fleckenstein,  M.,  Longstaff,  F.A.,  2020.  Renting  balance  sheet  space:  Intermediary
balance sheet rental costs and the valuation of derivatives. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33
(11), 5051–5091.

Foley-Fisher, N., Gissler, S., Verani, S., 2019. Over-the-counter market liquidity and

Foley-Fisher,  N.,  Narajabad,  B.,  Verani,  S.,  2016.  Securities  Lending  as  Wholesale
Funding: Evidence from the Us Life Insurance Industry. Technical Report, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Gagnon, J., Raskin, M., Remache, J., Sack, B., 2011. The financial market effects of
the federal reserve’s large-scale asset purchases. Int. J. Central Bank. 7 (1), 3–43.
Gay, G.D., Manaster, S., 1984. The quality option implicit in futures contracts. J. Financ.

Econ. 13 (3), 353–370.

Ghysels, E., Idier, J., Manganelli, S., Vergote, O., 2016. A high-frequency assessment of
the ECB Securities Markets Programme. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 15 (1), 218–243.

Hamilton, J.D., 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press.
Haynes, R., McPhail, L., 2021. When leverage ratio meets derivatives: Running out of

options? Financ. Mark. Institutions & Instruments 30 (5), 201–224.

Hazelkorn, T.M., Moskowitz, T.J., Vasudevan, K., 2022. Beyond basis basics: Liquidity
demand and deviations from the law of one price. J. Finance 78 (1), 301–345.
Hemler, M.L., 1990. The quality delivery option in treasury bond futures contracts. J.

Finance 45 (5), 1565–1586.

Anderson,  A.G.,  Du,  W.,  Schlusche,  B.,  2021.  Arbitrage  Capital  of  Global  Banks.

securities lending. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 33, 272–294.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400423L. Pelizzon et al.

(6), 2341–2382.

Hu, G.X., Pan, J., Wang, J., 2013. Noise as information for illiquidity. J. Finance 68

Mancini, L., Ranaldo, A., Wrampelmeyer, J., 2015. The euro interbank repo market.

Huszar, Z.R., Simon, Z., 2022. Leibniz Institute for Financial Research SAFE at the

Margrabe, W., 1978. The value of an option to exchange one asset for another. J.

House of Finance Working Paper.

International Security Lending Organization, 2021. Securities Financing Transactions.

International Security Lending Organization.

Jank, S., Mönch, E., 2018. The Impact of Eurosystem Bond Purchases on the Repo

Market. Research Brief, Deutsche Bundesbank.

Johnson, N., Kerpel, J., Kronstein, J., 2017. Understanding Treasury Futures. Tech Note,

CME Group.

Joyce, M., Lasaosa, A., Stevens, I., Tong, M., 2011. The financial market impact of
quantitative easing in the united kingdom. Int. J. Central Bank. 7 (3), 113–161.
Joyce,  M.,  Miles,  D.,  Scott,  A.,  Vayanos,  D.,  2012.  Quantitative  easing  and
unconventional monetary policy–an introduction. Econ. J. 122 (564), F271–F288.
Kandrac, J., 2018. The cost of quantitative easing: Liquidity and market functioning
effects of federal reserve MBS purchases. Int. J. Central Bank. 14 (5), 259–304.
Kandrac, J., Schlusche, B., 2013. Flow effects of large-scale asset purchases. Econom.

Lett. 121 (2), 330–335.

Kane, A., Marcus, A.J., 1986. Valuation and optimal exercise of the wild card option

in the treasury bond futures market. J. Finance 41 (1), 195–207.

Klingler, S., Sundaresan, S., 2019. An explanation of negative swap spreads: Demand
for duration from underfunded pension plans. J. Finance 74 (2), 675–710.
Klingler, S., Sundaresan, S., 2023. Diminishing treasury convenience premiums: Effects
of dealers’ excess demand and balance sheet constraints. J. Monetary Econ. 135,
55–69.

Koijen, R.S., Koulischer, F., Nguyen, B., Yogo, M., 2021. Inspecting the mechanism of

quantitative easing in the euro area. J. Financ. Econ. 140 (1), 1–20.

Krishnamurthy,  A.,  Nagel,  S.,  Vissing-Jorgensen,  A.,  2017.  ECB  policies  involving
government bond purchases: Impact and channels. Rev. Financ. 22 (1), 1–44.
Krishnamurthy,  A.,  Nagel,  S.,  Vissing-Jorgensen,  A.,  2018.  ECB  policies  involving
government bond purchases: Impact and channels. Rev. Financ. 22 (1), 1–44.
Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. The effects of quantitative easing on
interest  rates:  Channels  and  implications  for  policy.  Brook.  Pap.  Econ.  Act.  2,
215–287.

Krishnamurthy,  A.,  Vissing-Jorgensen,  A.,  2013.  The  ins  and  outs  of  LSAPs.  In:
Proceedings-Economic Policy Symposium-Jackson Hole. Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (7), 1747–1779.

Finance 33 (1), 177–186.

Merrick, Jr., J.J., Naik, N.Y., Yadav, P.K., 2005. Strategic trading behavior and price
distortion in a manipulated market: anatomy of a squeeze. J. Financ. Econ. 77 (1),
171–218.

Myers,  S.C.,  1977.  Determinants  of  corporate  borrowing.  J.  Financ.  Econ.  5  (2),

Paret, A.-C., Weber, A., 2019. German Bond Yields and Debt Supply: Is There a ‘‘Bund

Premium’’?. Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.

Pasquariello, P., 2018. Government intervention and arbitrage. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31

147–175.

(9), 3344–3408.

Pelizzon, L., Subrahmanyam, M.G., Tomio, D., Uno, J., 2016. Sovereign credit risk,
liquidity, and European central bank intervention: Deus ex machina? J. Financ.
Econ. 122 (1), 86–115.

Rime, D., Schrimpf, A., Syrstad, O., 2021. Covered interest parity arbitrage. Rev. Financ.

Roh, H.S., 2022. The Bond-Lending Channel of Quantitative Easing. Working Paper,

Stud. 35 (11), 5185–5227.

Stanford University.

Ruchin,  A.,  2011.  Can  securities  lending  transactions  substitute  for  repurchase

agreement transactions. Bank. LJ 128, 450.

Schaffner,  P.,  Ranaldo,  A.,  Tsatsaronis,  K.,  2019.  Euro  repo  market  functioning:

collateral is king. BIS Q. Rev. Dec..

Schlepper, K., Hofer, H., Riordan, R., Schrimpf, A., 2020. The market microstructure

of central bank bond purchases. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 55 (1), 193–221.

Song, Z., Zhu, H., 2018. Quantitative easing auctions of treasury bonds. J. Financ. Econ.

Van Binsbergen, J.H., Diamond, W.F., Grotteria, M., 2022. Risk-free interest rates. J.

Vasicek, O., 1977. An equilibrium characterization of the term structure. J. Financ.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2019. Discussion of Risk Free Interest Rates, by van Binsbergen,

Diamond, Grotteria. NBER MMFM Meeting, Berkeley University.

128 (1), 103–124.

Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 1–29.

Econ. 5 (2), 177–188.

JournalofFinancialEconomics166(2025)10400424