Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Optimal policy for behavioral financial crises✩

Paul Fontanier
Yale University, School of Management, 165 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Should policymakers adapt their macroprudential and monetary policies when the financial sector is vulnerable
to belief-driven boom-bust cycles? I develop a model in which financial intermediaries are subject to collateral
constraints, and that features a general class of deviations from rational expectations. I show that distinguishing
between the drivers of behavioral biases matters for the precise calibration of policy: when biases are a function
of equilibrium asset prices, as in return extrapolation, new externalities arise, even in models that do not have
any room for policy in their rational benchmark. These effects are robust to the degree of sophistication
of agents regarding their future biases. I show how time-varying leverage, investment and price regulations
can achieve constrained efficiency. Importantly, greater uncertainty about the extent of behavioral biases in
financial markets reinforces incentives for preventive action.

Dataset link: Optimal Policy for Behavioral Fina
ncial Crises (Original data)

JEL classification:
D62
E44
E52
E70
G28

Keywords:
Financial crises
Beliefs
Extrapolation
Macroprudential policy
Optimal policy under uncertainty

1.  Introduction

Should  policymakers  be  concerned  about  asset  price  booms,  and
should they act preemptively before they burst? Historically the domi-
nant paradigm among policymakers has relied on the idea that financial
crises are ‘‘bolts from the sky’’, triggered by unpredictable and large
negative shocks. Because private agents implicitly understand the risk-
iness of the activities they engage in, rapid growth in asset prices can
only be supported by sound fundamentals and is not a cause for concern
per se (Gorton, 2012, Geithner, 2014). This contrasts sharply with the
alternative, behavioral view of financial bubbles and crises that has
been revived after the great financial crisis. Following in the footsteps
of Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978), researchers showed that
factors such as credit growth and asset price booms successfully predict

financial crises (Jordà et al., 2015). At the same time, survey data sup-
ports the idea that investors’ beliefs are inconsistent with the Rational
Expectations hypothesis, generally pointing towards the importance of
extrapolation in financial markets (Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018). In
response, economists have developed a number of behavioral models
of  financial  instability.1 Still,  how  policymakers  should  adapt  their
toolbox when financial instability is driven by systematic behavioral
biases is largely an open question.

I tackle this question by constructing a model of financial crises in
which agents display arbitrary deviations from rationality, and analyze
optimal policy from the perspective of a social planner who recognizes
that agents may have behavioral biases. I use this model to clarify three
key normative questions surrounding the policy debate. First, which
features of behavioral biases matter for welfare and should therefore

✩
Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. I am extremely grateful to my advisors Emmanuel Farhi, Sam Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein and
Ludwig Straub for invaluable guidance and support. I also thank Nicholas Barberis, Francesca Bastianello, Jonathan Benchimol, Adrien Bilal, John Campbell,
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Chris Clayton, Maria Fayos Herrera, Xavier Gabaix, Nicola Gennaioli, Robin Greenwood, Antoine Jacquet, Spencer Yongwook Kwon,
Jean-Paul L’Huillier, Albert Marcet, Kenneth Rogoff, Alp Simsek, Larry Summers, Adi Sunderam, Jean Tirole, Luis Viceira, Jonathan Wallen, Michael Woodford,
several anonymous referees, and participants at the 2019 Sloan-NOMIS Workshop on the Cognitive Foundations of Economic Behavior, the CU-RIDGE 2021
Financial Stability Workshop, the 2022 Theories & Methods in Macroeconomics Conference, the AQR Top Finance Graduate Award Conference at CBS, the Virtual
Israel Macro Meeting, and numerous seminars for helpful comments. I am grateful to the Corps des Mines for supporting this research.

E-mail address: paul.fontanier@yale.edu.
URL: https://paulfontanier.github.io/.

1 See Bordalo et al. (2018), Greenwood et al. (2019), Maxted (2024) and Krishnamurthy and Li (2024). These models are able to match moments that are

inconsistent with rational frameworks, such as low credit spreads during the run-up to financial crises.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104005
Received 10 November 2023; Received in revised form 9 January 2025; Accepted 13 January 2025
Available online 28 January 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

P. Fontanier

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

be  a  concern  for  financial  stability?  Second,  is  there  still  room  for
intervention when the planner and the market share the same beliefs?
And third, how should regulators incorporate incomplete information
about behavioral biases when contemplating early action?

The contributions of this paper can be summarized in three points.
First, I show that welfare losses are driven by three key features of
behavioral biases: (i) irrational optimism in booms if financial frictions
might bind later on; (ii) future irrational pessimism during financial
crises; and (iii) how equilibrium prices impact biases. Second, I show
how regulators can use leverage, investment, and price regulation (such
as monetary policy) to improve welfare, and highlight which welfare
effects  are  robust  to  the  degree  of  sophistication  of  private  agents
and  thus  survive  even  if  the  planner  shares  the  same  beliefs  as  the
market. And third, I show that greater uncertainty about the extent of
behavioral biases in financial markets increases the incentives for the
planner to act early.

I  present  the  model  in  Section 2.  It  features  three  periods  and
two types of agents: financial intermediaries and households. Financial
intermediaries borrow by issuing deposits to households, and can invest
in the creation of risky assets. At the heart of the model lies a financial
friction: in the intermediate period, borrowing by intermediaries needs
to  be  secured  by  posting  risky  assets  as  collateral.  The  amount  of
borrowing available depends on the quantity of collateral, and on the
expectation  of  its  future  payoff.  Such  a  friction,  while  keeping  the
economy away from the first-best, does not create any externality in
a rational benchmark, and thus does not leave any room for policy.
The central element of the model is a general class of deviations from
rationality in the formation of agents’ expectations, which applies in
all periods. I introduce a behavioral bias that shifts agents’ perceived
distribution  of  future  dividends.  The  behavioral  bias  is  allowed  to
depend on both fundamentals and asset prices, and agents are allowed
to be potentially sophisticated about future biases. It is general enough
to represent many psychological phenomena, while keeping the welfare
analysis tractable.

I present the welfare analysis in Section 3, where a paternalistic
social planner evaluates welfare using his own (rational) expectations.
I start by fleshing out how behavioral factors and financial frictions
interact to create uninternalized welfare effects. This analysis clarifies
that irrational over-optimism in booms creates first-order welfare losses
only when there is a chance that financial frictions might later bind.
Furthermore, it highlights how the predictable components of future
behavioral biases formed inside a crisis also create losses and should be
monitored. Indeed, if private agents tend to be over-pessimistic during
financial crises, but neglect this future bias, they over-borrow in good
times.  If  the  social  planner  anticipates  that  future  behavioral  biases
will  be  on  the  side  of  over-pessimism  during  an  eventual  financial
crisis,  there  is  a  wedge  between  private  expectations  and  those  of
the social planner. Here again, the interaction with financial frictions
is crucial. Expected losses are greater when over-pessimism coincides
with deeper financial crises: behavioral biases are tightening an already
tight collateral constraint.

The welfare decomposition delivers a second key insight: precisely
distinguishing between the drivers of these behavioral biases matters.
When behavioral biases depend on asset prices, new externalities arise.
By borrowing and investing, agents influence the realization of equi-
librium prices, which can in turn alter the magnitude of behavioral
biases.  These  effects,  only  present  in  the  case  of  endogenous  senti-
ment, are akin to pecuniary externalities but work through beliefs. For
example,  short-term  borrowing  lowers  agents’  net  worth  in  a  future
crisis, which has a negative effect on future equilibrium prices. With
endogenous sentiment such as price extrapolation, this fall in prices
can trigger irrational pessimism, which tightens collateral constraints
and  deepens  crises.  Belief  amplification  thus  creates  an  externality
that calls for reducing leverage ex-ante. An additional effect, termed
a reversal externality, works through prices during the boom. Agents’
demand  for  risky  assets  in  good  times  bid  up  their  prices.  This  can

feed pessimism tomorrow by impacting the magnitude of behavioral
biases in the future. For instance, if agents are simply extrapolating
price changes, a high price in the past is a force that pushes agents
towards irrational pessimism later (Farhi and Werning, 2020). Hence
an increase in prices today will cause a reversal in beliefs tomorrow,
which will tighten collateral constraints and prevent all intermediaries
from rolling over their debt.

Notably, these externalities are present even when private agents
are fully sophisticated about future biases, and even if the market shares
the same beliefs as the regulator. Even though financial intermediaries
can be fully aware that the market will be irrationally panicking in
a  future  financial  crisis,  their  decisions  are  still  privately  optimal.
Atomistic intermediaries cannot coordinate to collectively reduce their
leverage  or  decrease  asset  prices  in  order  to  alleviate  the  effects  of
future  pessimism.  Only  an  intervention  from  the  planner  can  solve
these externalities, showing that naïvety or belief differences between
policymakers and market participants are not key for these results.

Section 4 fleshes  out  how  to  interpret  these  results  in  terms  of
real-world policy. The tax on short-term borrowing can naturally be
interpreted as capital structure regulation. If behavioral biases fluctuate
along the business cycle, the optimal level of these restrictions is time-
varying.  My  model  thus  calls  for  the  use  of  counter-cyclical  capital
buffers.  It  shows  that  the  time-variation  should  not  only  track  the
contemporaneous  extent  of  over-optimism  in  financial  markets,  but
should  also  consider  how  it  will  influence  the future realizations  of
behavioral  biases  in  eventual  crises,  as  well  as  the  expected  impact
of  future  prices  on  future  biases.  Similarly,  to  regulate  the  quantity
of investment, regulators can rely on the implementation of Loan-to-
Value (LTV) ratios. The optimal LTV limit should also be time-varying,
and should closely track the same behavioral biases as do the counter-
cyclical capital buffers. The reversal externality however calls for the
use of a third instrument in order to control prices. Monetary policy
can thus be used as a complementary tool, even when counter-cyclical
capital  buffers  and  LTV  ratios  can  be  flexibly  adapted.  A  monetary
tightening lowers contemporaneous asset prices which influences future
sentiment, relaxing collateral constraints in crises. Such action does not
require any information about biases in the boom phase, and is robust
to the level of sophistication of agents. This suggests that the concern
for the central bank should not only be placed on whether prices are
rational, but also on whether price booms will trigger further rounds
of price extrapolation later on.

It is however undeniable that identifying a bubble, or anticipating
future pessimism, is intrinsically difficult since corresponding funda-
mentals are not observable, a recurring argument from the advocates
of the ‘‘wait-and-see’’ approach (Bernanke, 2002). I acknowledge this
issue but show that the intuition goes in the opposite direction. I allow
the social planner to have an imprecise estimate of behavioral biases.
The key result is that the strength of the desired ex-ante intervention
on  leverage  is  actually increasing in  uncertainty.  The  more  uncer-
tainty there is about irrationality today, the more important it is to
tighten leverage restrictions today. Intuitively, this is because sentiment
interacts  with  financial  frictions  to  create  strong  non-linearities:  the
costs of having intervened when it turns out that the price boom was
entirely justified by sound fundamentals are dwarfed by the benefits of
mitigating a possible sentiment-driven financial crisis.

Relation  to  the  literature. This  paper  is  primarily  motivated  by  the
recent  empirical  evidence  on  credit  cycles  that  revived  the Minsky
(1977) and Kindleberger (1978) narratives. This line of research started
with Borio  and  Lowe (2002)  showing  that  asset  price  growth  and
credit growth predict banking crises, stimulating research on the pre-
dictability of financial crises. Schularick and Taylor (2012) demonstrate
that  credit  expansions  forecast  real  activity  slowdowns. Jordà  et  al.
(2015) and Greenwood et al. (2022) show that combining credit growth
measures  with  asset  price  growth  substantially  increases  the  out-of-
sample predictive power on a subsequent financial crisis. In a recent

2 

P. Fontanier

survey, Sufi  and  Taylor (2022)  argue  that  ‘‘all  told,  the  emerging
historical  evidence  supports  the  existence  of  systematic  behavioral
biases in explaining credit cycles’’. Direct evidence of such biases comes
from survey data: Bordalo et al. (2018) document the predictability of
forecast errors regarding credit spreads.

My paper integrates these lessons into the literature on normative
macro-finance. I follow earlier work characterizing generic inefficien-
cies created by incomplete markets (Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis,
1985; Greenwald  and  Stiglitz, 1986).  In  my  model,  the  amount  of
borrowing is limited by the expectation of the asset’s future payoffs,
a friction similar to Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). By contrast, most of
the recent normative literature (as in Mendoza, 2010, Bianchi, 2011
and Jeanne and Korinek, 2019) uses a collateral constraint that features
instead the current price of the asset. This creates a pecuniary external-
ity, since agents do not internalize how their ex-ante leverage decisions
impact market prices tomorrow, and hence the aggregate borrowing
capacity of the financial sector in the future. Dávila and Korinek (2018)
offer a sharp analysis of this market failure.

I  end  this  section  by  focusing  on  the  most  closely  related  pa-
pers. First, Farhi and Werning (2020) analyze an environment with a
zero lower bound and aggregate demand externalities, where agents
extrapolate returns. Second, Dávila and Walther (2023) study an en-
vironment  without  financial  frictions  with  general  belief  distortions
during the boom, and characterize optimal leverage and monetary poli-
cies.2 Third, Caballero and Simsek (2020a) study monetary policy when
macroprudential policy is constrained, and agents have heterogeneous
beliefs. I build on these results, and also complement them by showing
how:  (i)  behavioral  biases  create  powerful  welfare  effects  even  in  a
model without a market failure in its rational benchmark; (ii) different
types of biases lead to different forms of optimal intervention; (iii) the
externalities created by biases are robust to the degree of sophistication
of  agents;  and  importantly  (iv)  uncertainty  about  the  precise  extent
of  biases  in  financial  markets  reinforce  the  motives  for  preventive
intervention.

2.  Model

This section presents the framework that will serve as the basis for
the subsequent welfare analysis. The model is stylized in the tradition
of the over-borrowing literature (Lorenzoni, 2008), and financial inter-
mediaries play a crucial role (He and Krishnamurthy, 2013). To isolate
the effects of behavioral biases, it features a borrowing constraint that
does not create externalities in a rational equilibrium.

2.1.  Setup

Time  is  discrete,  with  three  periods 𝑡 ∈  {1, 2, 3}.  There  are  two
types  of  agents:  financial  intermediaries  (or  banks)  and  households.
Both types are present in measure 1. There is a single good used both
for consumption and for investment in the creation of a risky asset.
The risky asset can only be held by financial intermediaries, and pays
a stochastic dividend at times 𝑡 = 2 and 𝑡 = 3. The asset is also used as
a collateral by financial intermediaries to issue deposits in period 𝑡 = 2,
and this constraint depends on the expectation of the future payoff of
the asset. I define a ‘‘financial crisis’’ as a moment when the borrowing

2 I also contribute to this line of research by providing an alternative way of
modeling general belief distortions. My proposal is simpler to use, especially
for the welfare analysis, but at the cost of not being able to replicate the
arbitrary distortions on the entire probability distribution used in Dávila and
Walther (2023). For instance, Dávila and Walther (2023) can investigate how
policy depends on whether agents are optimistic regarding left-tail or right-
tail outcomes, a case my modeling choice cannot nest. However, it proves
particularly convenient when I study the empirically relevant case where the
social planner is uncertain about the precise extent of irrationality in financial
markets.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

constraint of financial intermediaries binds at time 𝑡 = 2.

Throughout the paper, the aggregate state of the world corresponds
to the dividend payment of the risky asset, and is denoted by 𝑧𝑡 at time
𝑡, while the equilibrium price of the risky asset is denoted by 𝑞𝑡.

2.1.1.  Beliefs
Beliefs about the exogenous state. The objective distribution of the ag-
gregate state 𝑧𝑡 is given by two independent cumulative probability
distributions 𝑧2 ∼ 𝐹2(𝑧) and 𝑧3 ∼ 𝐹3(𝑧), with support on R∗
+. At time 𝑡− 1,
all agents hold the same subjective beliefs about the aggregate state of
the world at 𝑡, given by distributions ̃𝐹𝑡. To keep the welfare analysis
tractable while being general enough to represent several psychological
phenomena, the deviations from the objective probability distribution
𝐹𝑡 are encoded in a scalar 𝛺𝑡:
̃𝐹𝑡(𝑧) = 𝐹𝑡(𝑧 − 𝛺𝑡)
Agents at time 𝑡 thus believe that the dividend paid in each state of the
world at 𝑡 + 1 will be 𝑧𝑡+1 + 𝛺𝑡+1 rather than 𝑧𝑡+1.

The behavioral bias 𝛺𝑡+1 is thus a location shifter on expected divi-
dends. In that respect, 𝛺𝑡+1 exactly represents the predictable component
at 𝑡 of forecast errors realized at 𝑡 + 1. A positive bias 𝛺𝑡+1 means that
agents are over-optimistic at time 𝑡 regarding the prospects of dividends
in the future. In this case, sentiment will be said to be high, or equiv-
alently  that  markets  are  displaying  ‘‘irrational  exuberance’’  (Shiller,
2015).  A  negative  bias 𝛺𝑡+1 means  that  agents  are  over-pessimistic
at 𝑡:  sentiment  will  be  said  to  be  low,  or  equivalently  that  markets
are  displaying  ‘‘irrational  distress’’  (Fisher, 1932).  The  generality  of
the approach comes from allowing the 𝛺 biases to depend on several
variables: fundamentals and prices.

(1)

Definition 1 (Behavioral Bias in Expectations). A behavioral bias at time
𝑡 is a function 𝛺𝑡+1 that can depend on fundamental or prices:

𝛺𝑡+1 ∶ 

𝑡 = {𝑧𝑡−𝑖, 𝑞𝑡−𝑖}𝑖≥0 → R

(2)

This implies that 𝛺 can also be an equilibrium object. This approach
is  particularly  flexible  for  the  subsequent  welfare  analysis,  since  it
summarizes  all  possible  distortions  in  a  single  quantity.  Throughout
the paper the biases 𝛺 are kept general, highlighting the properties
of  sentiment  that  matter  for  welfare.  It  will  be  useful  to  flesh  out
specific  examples  to  build  intuition,  however.  I  will  focus  on  two
functional forms that are common in the behavioral finance literature,
and have been used to explain the credit cycle facts I reviewed in the
introduction.3 The first case is fundamental extrapolation (Barberis et al.,
1998; Rabin and Vayanos, 2010; Bordalo et al., 2018), modeled here
in reduced-form as:

𝛺𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝑧(𝑧𝑡 − 𝑧𝑡−1)
where 𝛼𝑧 is  a  positive  number.  The  second  case  of  interest  is price
extrapolation (DeLong et al., 1990; Hong and Stein, 1999; Barberis and
Shleifer, 2003; Bastianello and Fontanier, 2024), modeled as:

(3)

𝛺𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝑞(𝑞𝑡 − 𝑞𝑡−1)
with 𝛼𝑞 > 0.4 While  price  extrapolation  is  aimed  at  explaining  the
same set of facts as fundamental extrapolation, it can have drastically

(4)

3 A  particularly  clear  survey  of  this  literature  can  be  found  in Barberis
(2018).  While  the  core  of  the  paper  focuses  on  these  two  cases,  other
behavioral  models  are  nested  by  the 𝛺-formulation,  such  as  sticky  beliefs,
behavioral inattention, and overconfidence.

4 Because there is no fundamental realization at 𝑡 = 1 or before, I assume
that there are hypothetic values 𝑧1 and 𝑧0 driving initial sentiment. The bias at
𝑡 = 1 about next period’s payoff will thus be 𝛺2 = 𝛼𝑧(𝑧1 − 𝑧0), while the bias in
the intermediate period will be given by 𝛺3 = 𝛼𝑧(𝑧2 −𝑧1). A boom-bust cycle in
the spirit of Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018) is thus represented by fundamental
realizations 𝑧1 > 𝑧0 (good news at 𝑡 = 1) followed by 𝑧2 < 𝑧1. Similarly, we
will postulate the existence of a hypothetic price 𝑞0 that prevailed in the past
and anchors agents’ expectations.

3 

P. Fontanier

different  implications,  and  in  particular  in  terms  of  policy.  This  is
because agents’ present and future beliefs now move with policies that
move asset prices.

Sophistication. Crucially for the results, agents are allowed to be biased
in the initial period 𝑡 = 1 as well as in the intermediate (crisis) period
𝑡 = 2. It thus begs the question of whether agents realize that they, or
the market, might be biased in the future. To flexibly show how my
results change with sophistication or naïvety, I introduce a parameter
that controls the level of sophistication of agents, 𝜁:

Definition  2 (Sophistication  Parametrization). At  time 𝑡 =  1,  agents
believe that their future time 2-selves will form expectations about 𝑧3
according to the following distorted probability distribution:
̃𝐹3,𝜁 (𝑧) = 𝐹3(𝑧 − 𝜁 ⋅ 𝛺𝑡)
The parameter 𝜁 ∈ R captures the level of sophistication of agents.

(5)

When 𝜁 =  0,  agents  expect  their  future  selves  to  have  unbiased
expectations regarding future dividends (naïvety). When 𝜁 = 1, agents
understand that their future selves will have expectations biased by 𝛺3.
Agents are partially sophisticated when 𝜁 ∈ ]0, 1[.5

Throughout the paper, I will use ̃E for the expectation of private
agents (formed using ̃𝐹 and ̃𝐹𝜁 ) and E for the Rational Expectations
operator:

̃E

𝑡[𝑧𝑡+1] = E

𝑡[𝑧𝑡+1] + 𝛺𝑡+1

(6)

2.1.2.  Environment
Preferences. Bankers have log-utility in periods 𝑡 ∈ {1, 2}, and linear
utility at 𝑡 = 3:
𝑈 𝑏 = ̃E
1

[
ln(𝑐1) + 𝛽 ln(𝑐2) + 𝛽2𝑐3

(7)

]

where 𝑐𝑡 is the consumption of bankers at 𝑡, and 𝛽 is the standard time
discount factor. For simplicity, households (lenders) have deep pockets
and linear utility throughout:

𝑈 ℎ = ̃E
1

[𝑐ℎ

1 + 𝛽 𝑐ℎ

2 + 𝛽2𝑐ℎ

3

] .

(8)

Financial  assets. There  are  two  assets  in  the  economy:  deposits  and
≥ 0 to households at
the risky asset. Intermediaries issue deposits 𝑑𝑡
time 𝑡, to finance their consumption and their investment in the risky
asset.  At  time 𝑡 =  1,  financial  intermediaries  can  create 𝐻 units  of
the asset by paying a convex cost 𝑐(𝐻). The equilibrium price of the
risky asset at 𝑡 =  1, by no-arbitrage, is thus 𝑞1 = 𝑐′(𝐻). This asset
pays stochastic dividends 𝑧2 and 𝑧3 in future periods, drawn from the
previously introduced independent cumulative probability distributions
𝐹2 and 𝐹3. Only intermediaries have the expertise required to hold risky
assets.6

5 Implicitly, this formulation assumes that sophisticated agents understand

how 𝛺3 will be determined according to information available at 𝑡 = 2.

6 Assets thus never change hands in equilibrium. This is in contrast with
the  notion  of  ‘‘fire  sales’’,  developed  first  in Shleifer  and  Vishny (1992),
where  liquidation  does  not  necessarily  allocate  assets  to  the  highest  value
users. Dávila and Korinek (2018) call these ‘‘distributive’’ externalities, where
redistribution  of  wealth  between  agents  with  different  marginal  rates  of
substitution  creates  an  inefficiency.  This  includes,  for  instance,  the  models
in Caballero  and  Krishnamurthy (2003), Lorenzoni (2008)  and Fanelli  and
Straub (2021). Although a rather stark assumption, it is consistent with He
et al. (2010), documenting that toxic MBS were always on the balance sheet
of financial intermediaries during the 2008 financial crisis. Haddad and Muir
(2021) provide further evidence suggesting that intermediaries are responsible
for a large fraction of risk premium variation in various asset classes. This also
allows me to sidestep ‘‘distributive’’ externalities that can lead to under- as well
as over-borrowing in the rational benchmark.

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Financial friction. At time 𝑡 = 2, financial intermediaries face a collat-
eral constraint: the amount they can borrow by issuing deposits must
be secured by the risky asset, and is thus limited by the expectation of
its future payoff. The collateral constraint takes the specific form:

𝑑2

≤ 𝜙𝐻 ̃E

2[𝑧3].

(9)

The lower 𝜙 is, the less the bank is able to issue deposits to households
in the intermediate period. Eq. (9) makes clear that subjective beliefs
will directly alter the refinancing capacity of the financial sector. I make
one parametric assumption that guarantees that the equilibrium is not
trivial.

Assumption  1. The  financial  friction  parameter  is  small  enough
such that the collateral constraint is not always slack, and hence that
financial crises are non-zero probability events:

𝜙 < 𝛽 .

(10)

Constraints. Financial intermediaries’ constraints are then as follows:

𝑐1 + 𝑐(𝐻) + 𝑞1ℎ1
𝑐2 + 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) + 𝑞2ℎ2

≤ 𝑒1 + 𝑑1 + 𝑞1𝐻
≤ 𝑑2 + (𝑧2 + 𝑞2)ℎ1

𝑐3 + 𝑑2(1 + 𝑟2) ≤ 𝑧3ℎ2
̃E
≤ 𝜙ℎ2

𝑑2

2[𝑧3]

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

where 𝐻 is the quantity of the asset created at 𝑡 = 1, ℎ1 is the quantity
intermediaries keep on their balance sheet at the end of period 𝑡 = 1,
and ℎ2 is the quantity of the risky asset held by financial intermediaries
at time 𝑡 = 2. In equilibrium, ℎ1 = ℎ2 = 𝐻 since households cannot hold
the asset, and all intermediaries are identical. Financial intermediaries
have an endowment 𝑒1 in the initial period.7

Throughout the paper, I make use of the marginal utility of con-
sumption of financial intermediaries, 𝜆𝑡 = 1∕𝑐𝑡 in period 1 and 2, while
𝜆3 =  1 in  the  last  period  because  of  linear  utility.  A  key  object  of
interest, as in most models with financial frictions, is the net worth 𝑛2
of financial intermediaries at 𝑡 = 2, defined as:
𝑛2 = 𝑧2𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1).

(15)

2.1.3.  Discussion of the environment

Financial intermediaries should be interpreted as levered financial
institutions  that  are  using  short-term  debt:  banks,  insurance  compa-
nies,  hedge  funds,  brokers,  etc.  A  favored  interpretation  is  that 𝐻
represents Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), complex products widely
used in repo markets. When concerns about the future value of these
assets arise, collateral values fall, forcing the banking system to cut
back on other activities in order to roll-over its short-term debt. The
model thus seeks to capture a typical ‘‘run on repo’’ as the panic of
2007–2008 (Gorton and Metrick, 2012).

The specific form of the collateral constraint assumes that short-
term debt is collateralized by the future cash-flows of the risky asset.
This  allows  me  to  fully  isolate  the  effects  of  behavioral  biases  on
welfare:  despite  the  presence  of  financial  frictions,  the  equilibrium
is  constrained-efficient  when  expectations  are  rational  (Dávila  and
Korinek, 2018). A large part of the normative macro-finance literature,
for this reason, uses an alternative formulation for financial frictions
to  obtain  pecuniary  externalities  (Farhi  and  Werning, 2016, Bianchi
and Mendoza, 2018, Jeanne and Korinek, 2019). A collateral externality
indeed  arises  when  the  collateral  constraint  depends  on  the current
price of the asset:

𝑑2

≤ 𝜙𝐻 𝑞2.

(16)

7 In order for financial intermediaries to always be able to repay their debt,

I assume that 𝜙 is low enough such that 𝜙 ̃E

2[𝑧3] < min 𝑧3 is satisfied.

P. Fontanier

Without taking a stance on which one is more realistic, I focus on the
future payoff constraint in Eq. (9) since it cleanly isolates the effects of
behavioral biases, and show in Appendix B the robustness of the results
to this alternative formulation.

2.2.  Equilibrium

We now proceed to formally define the equilibrium, and analyze it

in more details in the rest of this section.

Definition 3 (Equilibrium). Given the behavioral biases functions 𝛺2
and 𝛺3, a sophistication parameter 𝜁, as well as initial values 𝑧0, 𝑧1,
and 𝑞0, an equilibrium consists of a real allocation {𝑐1, 𝑐2(𝑧2), 𝑐3(𝑧2, 𝑧3),
1), 𝛺3(
3 (𝑧2, 𝑧3), 𝐻},  prices {𝑞1, 𝑞2(𝑧2)},  and  biases {𝛺2(
𝑐ℎ
2
1
(𝑧2))}, such that: (i) markets clear; (ii) agents maximize (7) and (8)
subject  to (11)–(14);  and  (iii)  behavioral  biases  are  consistent  with
Definitions 1 and 2.

2 (𝑧2), 𝑐ℎ

, 𝑐ℎ

2.3.  Equilibrium analysis

Households. Households are passive throughout the three periods, and
they pin down the rate of interest through their Euler equation: 𝛽(1 +
𝑟𝑡) = 1.

Financial intermediaries at 𝑡 =  2. Entering period 𝑡 =  2 with a stock
𝐻 of collateral assets, and debt 𝑑1 to repay, financial intermediaries
must decide on their borrowing and consumption levels. There are two
separate cases.
No  Crisis: When  financial  intermediaries  are  not  constrained,  their
Euler equation simply sets consumption such that:

𝜆2 =

1
𝑐2

= ̃E

2[𝜆3] = 1

(17)

2[𝑧3] = 𝛽(E

because of the linearity of utility in the last period. The consumption
level is thus independent of the price of the risky asset, and conse-
quently of any behavioral bias. The price of the collateral asset is then
simply given by 𝑞2 = 𝛽 ̃E
Financial Crisis: When the collateral constraint is binding, the associ-
ated Lagrange multiplier on the constraint, 𝜅2, is given by 𝜅2 = 𝜆2 − 1 >
0. This directly quantifies the severity of the crisis: it encodes how far
we are from the unconstrained equilibrium. The asset price comes from
intermediaries’ maximization which yields:
2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3] + 𝜙(1 − 𝑐2)E
E

2[𝑧3] + 𝛺3

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3]

𝑞2 = 𝛽 𝑐2

(18)

)
.

where the last term is a collateral premium. Consumption is coming from
the budget constraint of financial intermediaries (12), since agents are
against the collateral constraint:
𝑐2 = 𝑧2𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) + 𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3].

(19)

This  last  expression  makes  clear  that,  unlike  in  the  unconstrained
case, behavioral biases have direct effects on real allocations in crises.
Pessimism  (𝛺3 < 0)  reduces  the  amount  households  are  willing  to
lend to financial intermediaries, leading to a one-for-one fall in their
consumption  level 𝑐2.  I  distinguish  the  cases  when 𝛺 is  exogenous
or  endogenous  to  clarify  their  differences,  which  will  be  crucial  for
welfare.

Exogenous  bias. When 𝛺3 is  exogenously  set,  the  budget  constraint
equation is sufficient to obtain the consumption level in a crisis (as
in a rational benchmark). Sentiment simply shifts consumption by a
constant relative to the REE benchmark. It also has an effect on asset
prices  through  the  stochastic  discount  factor  and  the  expectation  of
future dividends. But this drop in asset prices does not spill back to
consumption, which is pinned down independently.

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Endogenous bias. When the behavioral bias 𝛺3 depends on equilibrium
prices 𝑞2, however, the budget constraint is not enough anymore to
determine the consumption level of financial intermediaries in a crisis.
The  equilibrium  now  requires  solving  for  a  fixed-point  between  the
budget  constraint  and  the  pricing  equation.  This  is  a  manifestation
of belief  amplification.8 Intuitively,  a  fall  in  net  worth  causes  a  fall
in current consumption. This decreases the stochastic discount factor
used  by  agents  to  price  the  risky  asset,  which  in  itself  creates  en-
dogenous pessimism. This leads the price of the asset to fall further,
which tightens the borrowing constraints of financial intermediaries by
aggravating pessimism, and in turn creates a further fall in the price
that leads to more pessimism.9

Financial intermediaries at 𝑡 = 1. The consumption Euler equation for
financial intermediaries in the initial period is simply given by:

(20)

1 = ̃E
1

]

[ 𝜆2
𝜆1

since  financial  intermediaries  and  households  have  the  same  time-
preference parameter 𝛽. Because consumption inside a crisis, 𝑐2, de-
pends  directly  on 𝑧2,  agents  with  an  optimistic  bias 𝛺2 > 0 expect
their future consumption to be higher than in reality. Accordingly, their
Euler equation directly implies that an optimistic bias translates into
over-consumption at 𝑡 = 1 relative to the rational benchmark, financed
by borrowing (so a higher 𝑑1). Similarly, the gap between expected and
realized consumption is driven, for the case of unsophisticated agents,
by future sentiment, since an 𝛺3 < 0 at 𝑡 = 2 leads to a tighter collateral
constraint.

Finally,  collateral  creation  is  driven  by  the  pricing  equation  of

intermediaries:

𝑞1 = 𝑐′(𝐻) = 𝛽 ̃E

1

]
(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

.

[ 𝜆2
𝜆1

3.  Welfare decomposition

(21)

This  section  describes  the  constrained  planning  problem  of  the
planner: at 𝑡 = 1, a social planner holding rational expectations realizes
that agents are subject to behavioral biases. Taking these biases as well
as general equilibrium effects into account, the planner seeks to find the
allocation that maximizes welfare, knowing that the future allocation
(at 𝑡 = 2) will be determined by private agents (subject to a bias 𝛺3).

3.1.  Decomposition

I present a general decomposition in the spirit of Dávila and Ko-
rinek (2018),  that  fleshes  out  how  a  marginal  increase  in  leverage,
investment or prices leads to uninternalized welfare consequences, and
classify the different channels. A key advantage of this approach is that
the decomposition naturally determines which features of behavioral
biases matter for financial stability, and need to be quantified by the
regulator. Two classes of effects appear in the following proposition,
which I then explore in turns.

Proposition 1 (Uninternalized Effects). The uninternalized first-order im-
pact on welfare, when infinitesimally varying one aggregate variable while
keeping the others constant, are given by:

8 In a setup where the collateral constraint depends on current prices 𝑞2, this
belief amplification channel compounds the traditional financial amplification
mechanism. See Appendix B.

9 While the equilibrium is ensured to be unique in the exogenous sentiment
case, this is not immediate anymore for endogenous sentiment. Appendix A.9
shows how linear forms of price extrapolation also guarantee the uniqueness of
a stable equilibrium. Complex non-linear forms of endogenous sentiment can
however lead to multiple equilibria. Since this is not the focus of this analysis,
for the rest of the paper I assume that belief distortions are not strong enough
such that equilibrium uniqueness is guaranteed.

P. Fontanier

(i) For short-term debt 𝑑1:



𝑑 =

1[𝜆2] − E

( ̃E
)
1[𝜆2]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑

[
𝜅2𝜙𝐻

− E
1

𝒅 𝜴𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟐

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑

]

;

(22)

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

world is enough. This insight, however, heavily depends on the degree
of sophistication of agents. Indeed, Eq. (25) makes clear that the second
part of this behavioral wedge disappears when agents are sophisticated
(𝜁 =  1): in this instance, agents realize that the crisis will be worse
because of over-pessimism in the future, and thus lower their leverage
in the initial period accordingly.

(ii) For investment in collateral assets 𝐻:
[



𝐻 =

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)
(𝛽E
− 𝜆1𝑞1
1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐻

)

+ 𝛽E
1

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝒅 𝜴𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟐

( 𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

𝑧2 +

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝐻

)]

;

3.3.  Externalities

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐻

(iii) And for prices 𝑞1:
𝑞 = 𝛽E
1

𝜅2𝜙𝐻



[

]

.

𝒅 𝜴𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟏

(23)

(24)

The  second  class  of  effects  are  externalities  that  works  through
future  (crises)  beliefs and prices.  They  are  operative  even  though,  as
explained  earlier,  there  is  no  externality  in  the  rational  benchmark.
Even  more  surprisingly,  they  are  effective  even  in  the  case  of  fully
sophisticated agents as can be seen from the absence of 𝜁 in these ex-
pressions. Let us examine in detail the terms composing this externality
for leverage:

[
𝜅2𝜙𝐻

]

𝒅 𝜴𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟐

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

Proof. All proofs are provided in Appendix A. □



𝑑 = −E
1

.

(26)

3.2.  Behavioral wedges

𝑑 and 

The first type of effects (the terms 

𝐻 of Eqs. (22) and (23))
are behavioral wedges, as in Farhi and Gabaix (2020). They quantify
differences  in  beliefs between  the  planner  and  the  market.  Take  the
behavioral wedge for leverage for instance. Its strength is driven by
the difference in the expected severity of crisis: when optimistic agents
expect a crisis, they expect to withstand it with stronger capital buffers
thanks  to  a  payoff 𝑧2 + 𝛺2 on  their  holdings  of  risky  assets,  rather
than  just 𝑧2.  Because  of  the  strong  non-linearity  of  the  model,  the
behavioral  wedge  is  a  complex  object.  Nonetheless,  an  infinitesimal
perturbation around the REE is enlightening (assuming 𝛺2 and 𝛺3 are
small state-by-state):

Proposition  2 (Behavioral  Wedge  Approximation). If 𝛺2 and 𝛺3 are
small state-by-state, the behavioral wedge for short-term debt, 
𝑑 , can be
approximated by:10
[
𝑑 ≃ −𝜴𝟐𝐻E

𝝀𝟐
𝟐

+ 𝜙𝐻(𝟏 − 𝜻)E

[
𝜴𝟑𝝀𝟐
𝟐

(25)

1

1

]

]

.

1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
(i)

𝜅2>0

1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
(ii)

𝜅2>0

The first term quantifies the welfare losses from contemporaneous
irrationality  at 𝑡 =  1.  It  is  negative  when 𝛺2 is  positive,  naturally
implying that an additional unit of leverage is costly when agents are
over-optimistic. Importantly the bias is multiplied by a measure of the
expected severity of a future financial crisis, outlining that what affects
welfare is not simply deviations from rationality, but their interaction
with financial frictions.

The  second  term  quantifies  welfare  changes  emanating  from  the
predictable  behavior  of  future  deviations  from  rationality, 𝛺3.  Once
again, predictable pessimism in the future is not enough to generate
first-order welfare losses: this term is non-zero only when the product
of  sentiment  with  marginal  utility  in  a  crisis  is  non-zero.  In  other
words, it is the comovement of irrationality with the health of financial
intermediaries that is a cause of concern for the planner (see Section 5.1
for suggestive evidence regarding this covariance). An interesting case
in point of Eq. (25) is that even if 𝛺2 = 0, welfare losses are possible
because of the predictable behavior of future irrationality. Even if, on
average, there is no deviation from rationality (i.e. E
1[𝛺3]  =  0), the
possible covariance of 𝛺3 with the health of financial intermediaries,
𝜆2,  creates  a  welfare  loss  from  increasing  leverage  in  period 𝑡 =  1.
This  implies  that  is  it  not  necessary  for  the  social  planner  to  know
the  current  state  of  irrational  exuberance  to  be  justified  to  act  pre-
emptively: knowing that agents will be pessimistic in bad states of the

10 The same first-order analysis for investment can be found in Appendix A.4.

The  first  term  is  the  Lagrange  multiplier 𝜅2,  again  indicating  that
welfare  losses  are  present  only  in  the  event  of  a  binding  financial
friction at 𝑡 = 2. The term 𝜙𝐻 then corresponds to the fact that this
externality operates at the level of the friction that limits borrowing
at 𝑡 = 2. The derivative 𝑑 𝑞2∕𝑑 𝑛2 quantifies the change in asset prices
implied by the change in short-term debt at 𝑡 =  1: taking on more
leverage mechanically lowers net worth in the future, which impacts
equilibrium prices in the future (see Section 2). For now, all of these
terms also exist in a rational world. The bold term, however, is specific
to behavioral distortions and is thus zero in a rational counterfactual,
making the expression zero in total. It measures how sentiment inside
a financial crisis changes when equilibrium prices change.

This externality can be intuitively described as follows. Agents fail
to  internalize  that,  by  increasing  their  leverage  in  good  times,  they
lower asset prices tomorrow, which can make everyone in the econ-
omy more pessimistic. This pessimism, in turn, tightens the collateral
constraint of financial intermediaries, preventing them to roll-over their
debt as desired, and aggravates the financial crisis.

For this externality to exist it is necessary for the belief derivative to
be non-zero. In other words, the collateral externality is operative if and
only if behavioral biases at 𝑡 = 2 are a direct function of equilibrium
prices at 𝑡 = 2. This means, for example, that any fundamental-based
behavioral bias as in (3) will not feature such a market failure. In the
natural benchmark of price extrapolation, as in (4), this derivative is
simply 𝑑 𝛺3∕𝑑 𝑞2 = 𝛼𝑞 > 0. This externality is then pushing towards
excessive borrowing.11

More  surprisingly,  the  collateral  externality  for  investment  in
Proposition  1, 
𝐻 ,  can  go  in  the  opposite  direction  as  the  leverage
one. Agents are not taking into account how a supplementary unit of
collateral, by raising net worth next period, can support asset prices
and thus consequently reduce pessimism. In turn, this ameliorates the
borrowing capacity of the whole economy, thus improving welfare.12 Ir-
rational exuberance thus helps overcome the under-investment problem

11 Notice that when this externality exists because of endogenous sentiment,
the price sensitivity 𝑑 𝑞2∕𝑑 𝑛2 that enters this expression is also magnified by
belief amplification. A change in net worth in period 𝑡 = 2 impacts equilibrium
asset prices as:
𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

1 − (𝜙 + (𝛽 − 𝜙)(2𝑐2 − 𝑛2)) 𝒅 𝜴𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟐

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3]

(𝛽 − 𝜙)E

(27)

=

.

A positive change in net worth leads to a change in price through the stochastic
discount factor 𝑐2, which itself can alleviate pessimism, supporting asset prices
in a feedback loop. This makes the price more sensitive to changes in net worth
when 𝑑 𝛺3∕𝑑 𝑞2 > 0.
12 In models where assets can change hands (Lorenzoni, 2008) the price of
the asset is decreasing in the aggregate quantity, since outside investors are
usually assumed to have a concave production function.

6 

P. Fontanier

coming from financial frictions.13 In a model with a collateral constraint
directly featuring 𝑞2, the rational benchmark features such a positive
collateral externality. Irrational exuberance thus helps to alleviate this
market failure. The welfare impact of an additional unit of investment
is  however  unambiguously  negative  for  large  enough 𝛺2,  since  the
behavioral wedge can be unboundedly negative.

The  last  part  of Proposition  1 highlights  another  effect.  In  most
models (rational models or models with exogenous sentiment) the two
uninternalized effects for leverage and investment are enough to char-
acterize efficiency. Indeed, once allocations are fixed the equilibrium
level  of  prices  has  no  effect  on  welfare.  The  problem  is  different,
however, in the presence of endogenous sentiment since a new state-
variable  enters  the  optimal  policy  problem:  the  equilibrium  level  of
asset prices today can enter the determination of future allocations, and
thus the expected level of welfare:

.

(28)



𝑞 = 𝛽E

1

]

[

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝒅 𝜴𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟏

This  effect  works  through  the  interaction  of  financial  frictions, past
asset prices, and sentiment in a crisis. The intuition for this term is
as follows. When private agents push up the price of the asset today, it
might influence the formation of behavioral biases in the future. This
is represented by the term 𝑑 𝛺3∕𝑑 𝑞1. Typically, in the illustrative price
extrapolation case where 𝛺3 = 𝛼(𝑞2 − 𝑞1), this derivative is equal to −𝛼,
a negative term. This change in sentiment at time 𝑡 = 2 impacts the
collateral limit for short-term debt 𝑑2, in proportion to 𝜙𝐻, a positive
quantity. It then impacts welfare if agents are against their borrowing
constraint, i.e. if 𝜅2 > 0, since it directly alters the amount they can
borrow. Succinctly, when agents bid up prices, this can feed pessimism
tomorrow by increasing the anchor agents use to form expectations: an
increase in prices today will cause a reversal tomorrow. I thus call this
effect a reversal externality. This new force is independent of the current
extent  of  behavioral  biases  in  the  initial  period,  and  has  important
implication for the conduct of policy as I show next.14

Finally, these externalities are robust to the degree of sophistication
of agents, as can be seen from the absence of 𝜁 in these expressions. As
for regular externalities, agents do not internalize that their decisions at
𝑡 = 1 can influence the determination of sentiment at 𝑡 = 2 if sentiment
depends on equilibrium variables like prices. Take the collateral exter-
nality for example. Market’s participants can be sophisticated enough
to realize that low prices in a future crises will create endogenous pes-
simism and tighten collateral constraints. But they cannot coordinate to
reduce their aggregate leverage at 𝑡 = 1, in order to sustain asset prices
in  a  future  bust  and  attenuate  future  pessimism.  Only  the  regulator
can internalize these effects, even though the regulator and the market
share the same beliefs about how sentiment will manifest itself in the
future.

Remark  1 (Intermediaries  vs.  Households  Beliefs). For  simplicity  and
conciseness, beliefs are assumed to be homogeneous through the paper.
Appendix D derives the same welfare decomposition as in Proposition 1
when financial intermediaries and households have different beliefs. It
highlights that, while intermediaries’ beliefs are what matters during
the boom, the beliefs of households are the ones shaping the welfare
losses during the bust. This is because the tightness of the collateral
constraint  directly  depends  on  households  beliefs  about  the  future

13 This is reminiscent of Martin and Ventura (2016), where bubbles help
alleviate financing frictions.
14 Similarly, Schmitt-Grohé  and  Uribe (2016)  show  that  with  downward
wage rigidity, past wages become a relevant state variable, motivating the
planner to reduce real wages in booms. This effect is also present in Farhi and
Werning (2020). In their model, a high price in the initial period can translate
into over-pessimism when the ZLB hits. This creates a downward pressure on
prices at the ZLB, which affects aggregate demand via a wealth effect.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

payoffs of the collateral (see Simsek (2013) for an in-depth analysis
of belief disagreement under collateral constraints).

4.  Optimal policy

4.1.  Constrained efficiency

I  can  now  characterize  the  allocation  the  planner  would  like  to
implement in the presence of sentiment, when solving the constrained
planning problem. A planner subject to the same constraints as agents,
with prices determined by market-clearing as in the decentralized case,
evaluates welfare using its own expectations. In particular, any direct
intervention  at 𝑡 =  2 is  proscribed.15 The  planner  thus  takes  the
previous uninternalized effects into account. These objects are crucial
to characterize optimal policy in this setting.

In  order  to  achieve  the  second-best,  the  planner  makes  agents
internalize their uninternalized welfare effects. This is done by choosing
taxes  or  subsidies  that  exactly  cancel  out  the  uninternalized  effects
described in Proposition 1.

Proposition  3 (Second-Best  Policy). The  social  planner  achieves  the
constrained-efficient second-best with three instruments defined by:

1. A tax 𝜏𝑑 = −
2. A tax 𝜏𝐻 = −
𝑞1−𝑞∗
3. A tax 𝜏𝑞 =
1
𝑞∗
1

𝑑 ∕𝜆1 on short-term borrowing;
𝐻 ∕(𝜆1𝑞∗
on the holding of collateral assets

1 ) on the creation of collateral assets;

where 𝜆1 is the marginal utility of financial intermediaries at time 𝑡 =  1
evaluated at the desired allocation, 𝑞1 is the price that would arise through
market-clearing at the desired allocation without the holding tax, and 𝑞∗
1 is
the price such that 𝑊𝑞 = 0 when evaluated at the desired allocation.

Proposition 3 is rather abstract, but makes two simple points. First,
the calibration of macroprudential policy should be done by focusing
on the key aspects of sentiment driving the uninternalized effects from
the  previous  part, 
𝐻 .  Second,  when  current  asset  prices
impact future sentiment, three instruments are needed to achieve the
second-best, and not only two.16

𝑑 and 

How can one interpret the results of Proposition 3 in terms of real-
world policy? The optimal taxes on debt and investment correspond to
the usual instruments in the macroprudential toolkit: capital require-
ments and Loan-to-Value (LTV) restrictions (Claessens, 2014). This is
not the case for the tax on holdings, designed to influence equilibrium
price.17 I now explore the concrete policy lessons coming out of the
analysis.

15 The  concept  of  constrained  efficiency  also  restricts  the  analysis  to  a
planner who takes financial frictions as given, following Hart (1975), Stiglitz
(1982)  and Geanakoplos  and  Polemarchakis (1985).  It  can  be  understood
as  answering  the  following  question:  can  a  planner  subject  to  the  same
constraints  as  private  agents  improve  on  the  market  outcome?  An  earlier
version (Fontanier, January 2022) allows the planner to intervene in crises
with bailouts.
16 Achieving the second-best does not imply that the benchmark rational
level  of  welfare  is  attainable.  This  is  because,  while  the  effects  of  over-
optimism  can  be  fully  resorbed  by  appropriate  prudential  regulation,  the
presence  of  pessimism  in  crises  makes  intermediaries  worse  off  even  with
optimal policy compared to the rational benchmark, since no intervention is
possible at 𝑡 = 2 to directly increase borrowing. The numerical exercise in Sec-
tion 5.3 suggests that this gap between the rational and constrained-efficient
allocations can be substantial.
17 Conceptually, another instrument is needed because biases are driven by
an equilibrium variable that falls outside the scope of traditional macropruden-
tial tools. In that sense, the role of prices is not crucial: one could imagine an
alternative where biases are a function of an equilibrium quantity not affected
by traditional tools, and another instrument would be needed to specifically
target it. I focus on prices in this paper as there is extensive empirical evidence
of price extrapolation (e.g. Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014).

7 

P. Fontanier

4.2.  Implementation

Counter-cyclical capital buffers. The tax on short-term borrowing can
naturally be interpreted as capital structure regulation. Proposition 3
thus provides the financial regulator with the features of behavioral
biases that are necessary to quantify in order to optimally calibrate
leverage restrictions. Because 𝛺2 is a largely volatile object (Bordalo
et al., 2024), the optimal value of this macroprudential leverage tax is
also time-varying. But importantly, the time-variation in 𝜏𝑑 should not
only track 𝛺2, but also take into account the expected future realizations
of 𝛺3 (if agents are not fully sophisticated) as well as the expected
impact of future prices on 𝛺3.18

LTV regulation. The second tax in Proposition 3 directly aims at regu-
lating the quantity of risky investments. For this reason, this policy can
be interpreted as loan-to-value (LTV) regulation. Importantly, the wel-
fare analysis highlights again that the optimal LTV limit is time-varying,
tracking the same behavioral biases as do leverage restrictions.

The crucial difference with capital requirements lies in the time-
variation  required  by  variation  in  the  expected  impact  of  prices  on
sentiment. When the regulator is concerned that a future crash in prices
will result in a greater sensitivity of sentiment with respect to prices
in a crisis (all else equal), the optimal reaction is to tighten leverage
restrictions  more  but  to relax LTV  ratios.  Indeed,  as  explained  in
Section 3.3, the collateral externality for 𝐻 calls for higher investment
than in the decentralized equilibrium, in order to alleviate pessimism
during crises by strengthening the net worth of the financial sector.

Price regulation. The third tax in Proposition 3 does not have a sim-
ple  relation  to  the  current  macroprudential  toolbox,  however.  This
underlines  the  need  for  an  additional  instrument  that  complements
traditional macroprudential policy. From an abstract perspective, this
instrument  can  be  modeled  as  a  tax  on  asset  holdings.  This  seems
rather unrealistic to implement, however. A more natural candidate for
this instrument is to use monetary policy, which is studies formally in
Appendix C. Leaning against the wind lowers current asset prices, which
will then cure future pessimism in a possible crisis – a new channel for
monetary policy. Furthermore, such action does not necessarily require
information about contemporaneous biases. A sharp increase in asset
prices could be entirely due to fundamentals, but the planner can still
have an incentive to make prices deviate from their rational value today
to  prevent  irrational  distress  from  happening.  Finally,  implementing
such a policy allows for financial regulation to be adapted and relaxed.
Indeed, by acting preventively the central bank makes the future re-
alizations of pessimism less severe, thus directly reducing the size of
behavioral wedges and of the collateral externality. Taking this into
account leads the optimal macroprudential limit to be less strict, which
raises welfare. The numerical exercise in Section 5.3 suggests that this
complementarity can be substantial.

4.3.  Sentiment uncertainty

I  so  far  assumed  that  the  social  planner  had  perfect  informa-
tion about behavioral biases. In a famous speech on asset price bub-
bles, Bernanke (2002)  discussed  the  ‘‘identification  problem’’  that
naturally arises once the financial stability authority contemplates a
proactive  approach  to  bubbles.  A  natural  question  of  practical  im-
portance is then whether my results are impaired in the presence of
imperfect knowledge about behavioral biases.

18 Leverage limits in this framework are also more robust than leverage taxes
to fluctuations in irrational exuberance: small movements in the behavioral
bias around a positive 𝛺2 lead to smaller welfare losses when a leverage limit
is imposed rather than leverage tax. Time-variation in the leverage limit is
nevertheless still required as long as the planner’s estimate of 𝛺3 given the
information available is time-varying.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

The  short  answer  is:  no,  to  the  contrary.  Sentiment  uncertainty
reinforces  motives  for  preventive  action,  in  contrast  with Brainard
(1967)’s ‘‘attenuation principle’’. While recognizing that identifying a
bubble is intrinsically difficult, this section shows that the widespread
intuition  that  this  uncertainty  calls  for  more laissez-faire is  actually
erroneous.

I study the case where the regulator is uncertain about the level of
irrational exuberance. To this end, I leverage the previous equilibrium
and welfare analysis. 𝛺3 is assumed to be certain and constant in the
future.19 Recall that private agents are shifting the entire distribution of
future dividends by 𝛺2, believing that dividends will be 𝑧2 + 𝛺2 instead
of 𝑧2. The following assumption make the analysis more convenient:

Assumption 2. All parameters of the model and of the probability
distribution 𝐹2(𝑧) are  common  knowledge  to  private  agents  and  the
social  planner,  except  possibly  for  its  mean,
̄𝑧2.  Additionally, 𝑞1 is
strictly increasing in ̄𝑧2.

]

This  imply  that,  in  the  absence  of  sentiment,  the  social  planner
could simply infer the value of ̄𝑧2 by looking at equilibrium prices. We
now assume that the social planner’s prior over sentiment is given by
a uniform distribution:
𝑤 ∼  [ ̄𝛺2 − 𝜎𝛺, ̄𝛺2 + 𝜎𝛺
where ̄𝛺2 is the average level of sentiment according to the planner’s
prior, and 𝜎𝛺 controls the amount of uncertainty around it. By observ-
ing asset prices the planner can infer what agents believe the average
future dividend is, so that the planner’s posterior mean regarding future
𝑞 (𝑞1) − ̄𝛺2.  Taking  the  uncertainty  in  its
dividends  becomes ̄𝑧2 = 𝑔−1
posterior into account, the planner first-order condition for short-term
debt is now given by:

(29)

𝑢′(𝑐1) =

1
2𝜎𝛺

∫
0

∞

[

𝜎𝛺

∫

−𝜎𝛺

𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

(𝑑1, 𝐻; 𝑞2, 𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2

) 𝑑 𝜔2

]

𝑑 𝐹2(𝑧2)

(30)

This  expression  contains  all  of  the  intuition  for  how  sentiment  un-
certainty  can  reinforce  or  weaken  the  need  for  preventive  leverage
tightening. Once deducing the average behavioral error ̄𝛺2, the planner
is uncertain about the exact distribution of the state of the world next
period. It thus takes the distribution that agents use, but factors in the
noise it attributes to their expectations. This leads the social planner
to consider, for each realization 𝑧2, all values inside the segment [𝑧2 −
𝜎𝛺, 𝑧2 + 𝜎𝛺] as equally likely.

If expanding the set of possible behavioral biases, by increasing 𝜎𝛺,
increases the value of the expectations term, it means that uncertainty
increases expected marginal utility. This implies that the social planner
wishes  to  reduce  the  leverage  of  agents  today  to  get  back  to  the
optimality condition, by increasing initial marginal utility 𝑢′(𝑐1), and by
diminishing expected future marginal utility. Conversely, if enlarging
the possible values of 𝜔2 decreases expected marginal utility, the social
planner should relax leverage constraints compared to the absolute cer-
tainty case. The following Proposition expresses that uncertainty about
behavioral biases unambiguously calls for precautionary restrictions.

Proposition 4 (𝛺2-Uncertainty and Leverage Restrictions). If the social
planner believes that the behavioral bias at 𝑡 = 1 can be expressed as ̄𝛺2 +𝜔,
where 𝜔 is uniformly distributed on [−𝜎𝛺, 𝜎𝛺], and 𝛺3 is constant state-by-
state at 𝑡 = 2, then the optimal leverage tax is increasing in uncertainty 𝜎𝛺,
and the optimal investment tax is decreasing in 𝜎𝛺.

The proof is rather involved (see Appendix A.6), but the intuition
can be understood succinctly. The key is to notice that marginal welfare

19 The analysis for 𝛺3-uncertainty is presented in Appendix A.7. The results
are identical.

8 

P. Fontanier

is  a convex function.  Intuitively,  sentiment  uncertainty  adds  terms
to  the  expectation  computed  by  the  planner  relative  to  the  private
solution, but the parts coming from intermediaries’ relative optimism
are more costly than the ones coming from relative pessimism.20 The
strong non-linearities associated with the interaction of sentiment with
financial frictions make it attractive to tighten capital requirements in
the face of uncertainty. Using the words of Yellen (2009), a ‘‘type 1’’
error is simply much less costly than a ‘‘type 2’’ error.

Remark 2 (Uncertainty and 𝐻-Regulation). Proposition 4 also highlights
that investment regulation behaves in a different way: an increase in 𝜎𝛺
calls for more investment in 𝐻 in the planner’s problem relative to the
private solution. This is because increasing uncertainty increases the
incentive to shift consumption to the next period. Indeed, if there is
a risk that agents are extremely over-optimistic and that a crisis will
be extremely severe, it is even more valuable to hold an asset paying
dividends, albeit low, in this state of the world. Concretely, this means
that in times of heightened uncertainty, the regulator should tighten
counter-cyclical capital buffers but at the same time relax LTV ratios.

5.  Applications and empirical relevance

5.1.  The importance of irrational pessimism

A perhaps surprising lesson of the model is that many of the effects
of behavioral biases on welfare are actually coming from the presence
of 𝛺3.  Indeed,  a  majority  of  the  effects  presented  in Proposition  1
operates  through  the  interaction  of  irrationality  with  the  health  of
financial intermediaries during crises.

One way to highlight this new result is to place ourselves at the
REE constrained-efficient allocation, where the planner has no reason
to intervene. If we add an infinitesimal degree of irrationality, which
forces cause first-order welfare losses? The answer comes by inspecting
Eqs. (22), (23),  and (24).  At  the  rational  expectations  constrained-
efficient equilibrium, behavioral wedges are zero, so the only effects left
are the collateral externalities and the reversal externality, expressions
(26) and (28). As explicated earlier, these are only present when future
sentiment is impacted by current and past asset prices, and there is a
positive probability of a crisis in the future.

The fundamental intuition behind this result is that small changes
in leverage due to fluctuating sentiment are not harmful to the first-
order since agents are on the objective Euler equation. But anything
that directly impacts the tightness of the collateral constraint in a crisis,
where agents are not on their Euler equation, has a first-order impact
on welfare by aggravating financial turmoil.21

5.2.  Relevant empirical moments for policymakers

These results draw attention to irrational distress during financial
crises, while the literature has mostly focused on irrational exuberance
during the build-up leading to the crash. It also provides guidance to

20 The same insights can be obtained if we were to consider uncertainty
about the extent of sentiment inside a financial crisis. Endogenous sentiment,
for  example  in  the  form  of  price  extrapolation,  amplifies  this  effect  by
adding more curvature. Additionally, uncertainty around the strength of the
extrapolation mechanism reinforces the need for price regulation. These results
are presented in Appendix A.7.
21 Irrational exuberance is of course also costly, as it triggers more frequent
credit crunches. It is also possible that irrational distress is a direct function
of past optimism, creating the same kind of reversal externality, but the first-
order  damages  to  welfare  would  not  be  directly  attributable  to  irrational
exuberance either. There is also the possibility that over-optimism has other
effects on investment in the real sector, which can be costly as in Rognlie et al.
(2018).

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

policymakers on what precise information and moments about behav-
ioral biases should be collected and monitored. In addition to the level
of  irrational  exuberance,  my  theoretical  analysis  identifies  four  key
properties of beliefs that need to be quantified by the regulator:

1

1. 𝑪 𝒐𝒗(𝜴𝟑, 𝝀𝟐): Proposition  2 underlines  that  the  optimal  level
of macroprudential policy depends on the covariance between
the predictable amount of irrational pessimism and the balance
sheet  health  of  financial  intermediaries.  Suggestive  evidence
supports the assumption that the two objects 𝛺3 and 𝜆2
𝜅2>0
negatively  comove: Fig.  1 uses  two  proxies  to  construct  time
series  for 𝛺3 and  for 𝜆2,  and  shows  how 𝛺3 is  consistently
negative in crises.22
2. 𝒅 𝜴𝟑
: Does the magnitude of irrational pessimism depend on the
𝒅 𝒒𝟐
level of asset prices inside a crisis? If yes, this is a first-order
effect  for  the  calibration  of  macroprudential  policy.  For  in-
stance, McCarthy and Hillenbrand (2022) estimate that between
19%  and  33%  of  mispricing  movements  in  the  stock  market
can be attributed to price extrapolation rather than fundamental
extrapolation.  It  remains  an  open  question  whether  this  also
applies to assets used as collateral by financial intermediaries.
3. 𝒅 𝜴𝟑
: Does the magnitude of irrational pessimism depend on the
𝒅 𝒒𝟏
equilibrium  level  of  asset  prices before the  bust?  While  some
form  of  price  extrapolation  is  a  necessary  ingredient  here  to
generate  a  role  for  policy,  it  is  not  sufficient.  To  counter  the
Reversal externality fleshed out in (28), the planner must act
to decrease prices in order to predictably lessen the amount of
irrational pessimism in a future crisis. The planner must thus
understand if agents mechanically extrapolate from equilibrium
prices or from the component of prices that is invariant to policy.
Whether a monetary tightening, for instance, causally impact the
future magnitude of irrational pessimism is an open question.
A  quantification  of  this  object  is  necessary  to  know  whether
monetary policy should lean against the wind.

4. 𝝈𝜴: Given the planner’s estimate of behavioral biases at a given
time, the width of the confidence interval around that estimate
also matters for optimal policy. Given the model of expectation
formation preferred by the planner to explain behavioral biases,
how much of the realized variation in forecast errors of private
participant can be explained by this model? The lower this share,
the more important it is to factor in this uncertainty. As shown in
Section 4.3, this uncertainty is then compounded by the degree
of non-linearities in financial crises.

5.3.  Numerical illustration

For conventional models of expectation formation, how large are
likely to be these effects? This section proposes a numerical exercise to
illustrate these results. Since the model is stylized and designed for a
closed-form normative analysis, this exercise is meant as an illustration
rather than a full-fledged calibration. I use standard values for the dis-
count factor (𝛽 = 0.98) and risk aversion (𝛾 = 2). I calibrate the financial
friction parameter to 0.75: an average value for margins required by the
Federal Reserve when pledging risky loans.23 The dividend processes 𝑧2
and 𝑧3 are assumed to be following an i.i.d uniform distribution, and
𝐻 is normalized to 1.

To close the calibration and match reasonable moments, I start by
assuming  that  belief  distortions  are  formed  according  to  diagnostic

22 See also Bordalo et al. (2018) and Maxted (2024) for other examples of
over-pessimism.  An  earlier  version  (Fontanier, January  2022)  also  presents
other alternatives to measure sentiment, leading to the same result.
23 See  the  margins  tables  at https://www.frbdiscountwindow.org/Pages/
Collateral/collateral_valuation (accessed in October 2024).

9 

P. Fontanier

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Fig. 1. Time-series variation of proxies for 𝜆2 and 𝛺3.
For the financial health of intermediaries 𝜆2, I rely on He et al. (2017) which computes an intermediary capital ratio. The inverse of this capital ratio is proportional to 𝜆2 when
agents have log-utility. For 𝛺3, I use the inverted forecast errors made by stock market analysts on the long-term growth of stocks, a measure of Bordalo et al. (2024) which is
directly constructed from survey data.

(31)

expectations (Bordalo et al., 2018):
)
𝛺3 = 𝜃 (𝑧2 − E[𝑧2]
To  be  conservative  about  the  role  of  behavioral  biases  in  driving
financial crises, I use for 𝜃 the estimate of Bordalo et al. (2020), at the
very-low end of values found in the literature.24 Since the asset does
not pay dividends at 𝑡 = 1, 𝛺2 is drawn randomly from the probability
distribution of 𝛺3 to ensure that both behavioral biases have the same
magnitude  on  average.  I  then  calibrate  the  mean  and  volatility  of
the  probability  distribution  of  dividends 𝑧 to  match  two  aggregate
empirical moments. First, the frequency of financial crises in the data is
between 4% and 6% (Taylor, 2015). Second, the Intermediary Capital
Ratio  of  intermediaries  (proportional  to 𝜆−1
2 )  fell  by  around  60%  in
2008 (He et al., 2017). The model with diagnostic expectations is then
calibrated to reproduce an average probability of crises close to 5%,
and the fall in 𝜆−1
2

to be 60% in a worst-case scenario.
Table 1 starts by showing the outcome of the simulation over all
possible values for 𝛺2 (so that investors are initially as likely to be
optimistic as pessimistic). The unconditional probability of a financial
crisis is 5.2%, comparing with only a 0.76% in the rational expectations
case. Interestingly, Table 1 suggests that most of this increase in the
frequency  of  financial  crises  is  attributable  to  the  presence  of  over-
pessimism during bad times rather than over-optimism in good times,
which echoes the previous discussion in Section 5.1.

From  a  normative  perspective, Table  1 shows  that  the  average
change in leverage required by the rational planner is very small. This
is because, as pointed out in Section 4.2, optimal policy becomes highly
state-contingent. Table  2 thus  presents  the  results  of  the  numerical
exercise when conditioning on a positive realization of the behavioral
bias 𝛺2 (in other words when intermediaries are over-optimistic ex-
ante). As expected, crises are more frequent (probability of 6.7%) as

24 Specifically, Bordalo et al. (2020) estimate an average diagnostic param-
eter of 0.5. With a persistence of fundamentals of 0.4 (Bordalo et al., 2018),
this means that agents’ reaction to dividend realization is roughly 20 percent
larger than the REE benchmark. Other studies have found higher values for
this parameter, closer to 1 (Bordalo et al., 2019; L’Huillier et al., 2024; Bianchi
et al., 2024). Despite this conservatism, the differences with the rational case
are large.

10 

well as more severe, but agents almost entirely neglect this risk. The
optimal  policy  then  requires  a  substantial  decrease  in  the  leverage
of  financial  intermediaries, −10.1%,  highlighting  that  macropruden-
tial  policy  must  be  highly  flexible  over  the  cycle.  It  should  also  be
noted that the optimal policy does not amount to implementing the
REE allocation, as discussed in Section 4.1. The presence of eventual
pessimism in bad times makes it optimal to implement a lower level
of leverage for intermediaries than in the REE benchmark, since this
directly worsens crises through the collateral constraint. Table 2 shows
that this difference is not negligible: with behavioral biases, equilibrium
borrowing is only 7.3% larger than in the REE benchmark.

Finally, Table 3 performs the same exercise but instead condition
on 𝛺2 being two standard deviations above its zero-mean. The results
are  intuitive  and  expected:  crises  are  more  probable,  more  severe,
and the optimal policy wants to rein in credit more. This echoes the
crises predictability results surveyed in Sufi and Taylor (2022): when
credit growth rises one standard deviation above its mean, the expected
crisis probability almost doubles relative to its baseline level. Overall,
this numerical exercise suggests that the crises predictability indicators
of this literature could be useful to serve as proxies for the optimal
time-variation in macroprudential policy.

To place these numbers in the context of the broader macropru-
dential literature, it is useful to look at (rational) models that feature
collateral externalities. Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) find that the social
planner  implements  a  debt  level  that  is  approximately  10%  lower
than  the  decentralized  equilibrium  before  a  financial  crisis  hits  (see
Figure 1 in Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018). My numerical illustration thus
suggests that the optimal policy aimed at taming behavioral financial
fragility has a similar order of magnitude. A crucial difference with this
literature, however, is that in my model the optimal policy fails to bring
the probability of crises close to zero (still elevated at 4.6%). This is
because of the presence of 𝛺3 in bad times, which ex-ante policy cannot
solve. This stands in sharp contrast with conventional macroprudential
models,  such  as Bianchi (2011)  and Bianchi  and  Mendoza (2018),
where the social planner cuts the probability of a financial crisis more
than tenfold.

The above analysis was conducted under the assumption that sen-
timent is driven by fundamentals, a case where the literature gives us
empirical guidance on the size of the behavioral biases. The analytical

P. Fontanier

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Table 1
Exogenous Sentiment, Unconditional Moments.
Baseline

Rational

Only 𝛺2

Only 𝛺3

Sophistication

Probability of Crises (%)
0.76
Perceived Probability (%)
0.76
Severity of Crises (%)
−37.9
Optimal Change in Leverage (%)
–
Note: The third column estimates the moments, while imposing 𝛺3 = 0 in all states of the world. The fourth column
imposes 𝛺2 = 0. The last column assumes that intermediaries are fully sophisticated (𝜁 = 1) about the future bias
𝛺3. The severity of crises is equal to the average decrease in 𝜆−1
2 . The optimal change in leverage computes the
required change in 𝑑1 to implement the planner’s solution.

1.5
2.1
−38.6
0.48

4.3
4.3
−45.7
2.0

5.3
0.8
−47.6
−3.0

5.2
2.1
−48.0
−2.6

Table 2
Exogenous Sentiment, Moments Conditional on 𝛺2

≥ 0.

Baseline

Rational

Only 𝛺2

Sophistication

0.76
0.76
−37.9
–
–

6.7
0.06
−51.6
−10.1
−7.3

Probability of Crises (%)
Perceived Probability (%)
Severity of Crises (%)
Optimal Change in Leverage (%)
Change to REE Leverage (%)
Note: The third column estimates the moments, while imposing 𝛺3 = 0 in all states of the world. The fourth column
imposes 𝛺2 = 0. The last column assumes that intermediaries are fully sophisticated (𝜁 = 1) about the future bias
𝛺3. The severity of crises is equal to the average decrease in 𝜆−1
2 . The optimal change in leverage computes the
required change in 𝑑1 to implement the planner’s solution. The Change to REE leverage computes the average
difference between the equilibrium 𝑑1 and its rational counterfactual: a negative number indicates that leverage is
higher than in the REE benchmark.

2.7
0.06
−42.4
−7.3
−7.3

5.9
2.3
−49.8
−6.8
−3.9

Optimal Policy
4.6
0.0
−46.0
–
3.1

Table 3
Exogenous Sentiment, Moments Conditional on high 𝛺2 (2 s.d.).

Baseline

Rational

Only 𝛺2

Sophistication

0.76
0.76
−37.9
–
–

8.4
0.0
−55.6
−17.0
−14.4

Probability of Crises (%)
Perceived Probability (%)
Severity of Crises (%)
Optimal Change in Leverage (%)
Change to REE Leverage (%)
Note: The third column estimates the moments, while imposing 𝛺3 = 0 in all states of the world. The fourth column
imposes 𝛺2 = 0. The last column assumes that intermediaries are fully sophisticated (𝜁 = 1) about the future bias
𝛺3. The severity of crises is equal to the average decrease in 𝜆−1
2 . The optimal change in leverage computes the
required change in 𝑑1 to implement the planner’s solution. The Change to REE leverage computes the average
difference between the equilibrium 𝑑1 and its rational counterfactual: a negative number indicates that leverage is
higher than in the REE benchmark.

4.6
0.0
−46.9
−14.4
−14.4

7.6
0.0
−53.3
−13.3
−10.5

Optimal Policy
4.6
0.0
−46.0
–
3.1

Table 4
Endogenous Sentiment.

Unconditional

Rational

𝛺2 > 0

Probability of Crises (%)
Perceived Probability (%)
Severity of Crises (%)
Optimal Change in Leverage (%)
Note: The third column estimates the moments, conditional on 𝛺2 being positive at 𝑡 = 1. The last column estimates
the moments, conditional on 𝛺2 being two standard-deviation higher than its unconditional mean at 𝑡 = 1. The
severity of crises is equal to the average decrease in 𝜆−1
2 . The optimal change in leverage computes the required
change in 𝑑1 to implement the planner’s solution.

0.76
0.76
−37.9
–

4.8
2.1
−39.9
0.5

9.3
0.1
−54.0
−7.2

High 𝛺2 (2 s.d.)
12.2
0.0
−61.4
−14.4

results of Section 3.3, however, emphasized that other welfare conse-
quences can arise when sentiment is instead driven by prices. I thus
repeat the exercise, using instead price extrapolation as in (4), cali-
brated to match the same unconditional crisis probability from Taylor
(2015). The results are presented in Table 4.

Two results stand out. First, while the unconditional probability of
crises is similar, it becomes higher once conditioning on over-optimism
in  good  times.  This  is  due  to  the  specific  interaction  that  appears
between sentiment in periods 1 and 2 with price extrapolation: over-
optimism boosts asset prices, making the reversal sharper. Similarly,
and for the same reason, crises are more pronounced. At the same time,
the optimal policy becomes less aggressive. While perhaps surprising,
this result is intuitive: by lowering leverage, macroprudential policy
has a second-round positive impact with price extrapolation. Entering
a crisis period with higher net worth supports asset prices 𝑞2, which
in  turn  reduces  the  magnitude  of  over-pessimism 𝛺3.  The  required

reduction in leverage stays nevertheless substantial, at 14.8% when 𝛺2
is two standard deviations above its mean.

Lastly, this numerical illustration can help us assess whether the
reversal  externality  is  a  likely  important  channel  for  policy.  In  the
spirit  of Appendix  C,  I  explore  the  impact  of  using  interest  rates  to
lean against asset prices. Nagel and Xu (2024) estimate that a 25 bp
surprise interest rate increase leads to a 156 bp fall in asset prices.
Table  5 shows  the  results  of  this  experiment.  By  indirectly  relaxing
the collateral constraint in future crises, this allows the planner to be
less aggressive in forcing the intermediaries to reduce their leverage.
Tightening substantially more, by a full 50 bp, has a more pronounced
effect. Interestingly, it is still not enough to bring the crisis probability
close to rational levels: in the case of high irrational exuberance, this
probability is still elevated at 7.6%. While this suggests that leaning
against the wind might not be the right tool to avoid the occurrence of
behavioral financial crises, it still seems to be a powerful complement

11 

P. Fontanier

Table 5
Monetary Policy Experiment.

𝛺2: 1 s.d.
25 bps 50 bps 0
7.6
−0.53

0

Monetary Tightening
Probability of Crises (%)
10.7 10.7
Optimal Change in Leverage (%) −7.0 −3.3
Note: The first three columns condition on 𝛺2 being one standard-deviation higher than
its unconditional mean at 𝑡 = 1, and the last three columns condition on 𝛺2 being two
standard-deviation higher. For each, I estimate the moments for three cases: (i) no change
in the policy rate, (ii) a 25 bp increase, and (iii) a 50 bps increase. The optimal change in
leverage computes the required change in 𝑑1 to implement the planner’s solution.

12.2
−14.4 −10.9

12.2
−7.4

𝛺2: 2 s.d.
25 bps 50 bps
12.2

to traditional macroprudential policy. Fully assessing its optimal use
would need a full-fledged calibration of the benefits of relaxing leverage
limits,  and  to  compare  it  to  the  real  costs  of  a  surprise  monetary
tightening.

6.  Conclusion

Should financial regulators and monetary authorities try to mitigate
the potential instabilities associated with irrational booms and busts?
In this paper I provide a framework that allows for the rigorous analysis
of this crucial policy question. I showed how leverage, investment and
price regulations can achieve constrained efficiency in the presence of
behavioral biases, even in an environment that does not feature any
externality in its rational benchmark. Some of the effects uncovered
depend directly on beliefs being a function of equilibrium prices, and
are robust to the degree of sophistication of agents.

While the model can be extended along several dimensions, the re-
sults suggest a need for research on two specific dimensions. First, while
empirical research has convincingly demonstrated that overreaction is
a pervasive feature of financial markets, we have less certainty about
its drivers. My paper shows that understanding what drives deviations
from  rationality  will  simultaneously  advance  our  comprehension  of
what policy can and should do to deal with financial bubbles. Second,
in my model the small number of periods obfuscates the timing sub-
tleties faced by regulators. But we have little understanding over the
dynamic build-up of sentiment, and over which horizon it is influenced
by  monetary  policy  and  asset  prices.  Further  research  is  needed  to
fully grasp the complex timing interactions between policy, crises, and
behavioral biases.

Declaration of competing interest

None.

Appendix A.  Proofs and derivations

A.1.  Proof of Proposition 1

Leverage. At  time 𝑡 =  2,  the  welfare  of  financial  intermediaries  ac-
cording  to  the  planner’s  (rational)  expectations  can  be  written  as:

)
2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2, 𝑞1)]



2 =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝛽 ln

(𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻E
+𝛽2 (E
2[𝑧3]𝐻 + 𝑛2

𝛽 (𝛽E

2[𝑧3]𝐻 − 𝜙𝐻E
)

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2, 𝑞1)]∕𝛽)

≤ 𝑧∗

if 𝑧2
otherwise

(A.1)

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

]

[𝜆2

(A.3)

= 𝜆1 − ̃E
1

the first-order condition on borrowing gives:
𝜕
𝑏,1
𝜕 𝑑1
where 𝜆𝑡 is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint at time
𝑡. The social planner maximizes the same function, but under its own
expectations,  and  by  also  taking  into  account  how  a  change  in 𝑑1
impacts asset prices in period 2. This leads to the following first-order
condition:
𝜕𝑆 𝑃
𝜕 𝛺3
𝑏,1
𝜕 𝑑1
𝜕 𝑞2
where 𝜅2 is the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint at 𝑡 = 2.
Hence simply by incorporating ̃E
1[𝜆2] we can express the total change
in welfare as internalized plus uninternalized effects:
𝜕𝑆 𝑃
𝑏,1
𝜕 𝑑1

𝜕 𝑞2
− E
𝜕 𝑛2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Uninternalized

[𝜆2
1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Internalized

] 𝑑 𝑛2
𝑑 𝑑1

= 𝜆1 − ̃E

= 𝜆1 + E

[𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝜕 𝛺3
𝜕 𝑞2

+ ̃E
1

𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝑛2

− 𝛽E
1

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

− 𝛽E

(A.5)

(A.4)

[𝜆2

[𝜆2

[𝜆2

[

]

]

]

]

]

1

1

1

which proves the first part of Proposition 1.

Investment. Using  the  same  expressions  as  in (A.1),  the  Lagrangian
corresponding to bankers’ problem in period 𝑡 = 1 is given by:
[𝑐1+𝑐(𝐻) −𝑑1−𝑒1
]

2(𝑛2, 𝐻; 𝑞2, 𝑧2𝛺3(𝑞2, 𝑞1))]

[𝑢(𝑐1) + ̃E

1[

𝑏,1 =

(A.6)

−𝜆1

]

= −𝜆1𝑐′(𝐻) +𝛽 ̃E
1

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2+𝛺2)(𝑧2+𝛺2+𝑞2(𝑧2+𝛺2, 𝛺3(𝑞2, 𝑞1)))

the first-order condition on investment yields:
𝜕
𝑏,1
𝜕 𝐻
The  social  planner  maximizes  the  same  function,  but  under  its  own
expectations,  and  by  also  taking  into  account  how  a  change  in 𝑑1
impacts  asset  prices  in  period  1  and  2.  This  leads  to  the  following
first-order condition:
𝜕𝑆 𝑃
𝑏,1
𝜕 𝐻

− 𝜆1𝑐′(𝐻) + 𝛽E
1

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

[𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝐻

( 𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝑛2

𝜕 𝛺3
𝜕 𝑞2

= 𝛽E

𝑧2 +

(A.7)

)

]

1

(A.8)

the second part of Proposition 1 is then proved once we notice that:
𝜕𝑆 𝑃
𝑏,1
𝜕 𝐻

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

= 𝛽 ̃E

+

1

− 𝜆1𝑞1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Internalized

𝛽E
1

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

−𝛽 ̃E

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

1

+𝛽E
1

[𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝜕 𝛺3
𝜕 𝑞2

( 𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝑛2

𝑧2 +

)

]

.

𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝐻

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Uninternalized

(A.9)

Prices. The only variable that can be changed, at 𝑡 = 2, by a change in
𝑞1, is 𝛺3 (remember that we are keeping everything else fixed at 𝑡 = 1).
Hence the welfare change is given by:
𝑑
𝑑 𝛺3
1
𝑑 𝑞1
𝑞1

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞1

(1 + 𝑟2)]

1[𝜆2𝜙𝐻

− 𝛽 𝜙𝐻

(A.10)

= 𝛽E

where once again the first part in the expectation corresponds to the
change in consumption at 𝑡 = 2 induced by the shift in the collateral
limit, and the second part corresponds to the decrease in consumption
at 𝑡 =  3 since  the  amount  that  needs  to  be  repaid  is  higher.  That
leads, using 𝜅2 = 𝜆2 − 1 and 𝛽(1 + 𝑟2) = 1, to the reversal externality
formulation:



𝑞 = 𝛽E

1[𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞1

]

(A.11)

with 𝑛2 = 𝑧2𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1),  while  the  Lagrangian  corresponding  to
bankers’ problem in period 𝑡 = 1 is given by:

A.2.  Proof of Proposition 2



𝑏,1 =

[𝑢(𝑐1) + ̃E

1[

]
2(𝑛2, 𝐻; 𝑞2, 𝑧2, 𝜁 𝛺3(𝑞2, 𝑞1))]

− 𝜆1

[𝑐1 + 𝑐(𝐻) − 𝑑1 − 𝑒1
(A.2)

]

I  compute  the  difference  between 𝜆2 expected  by  private  agents
and 𝜆2 expected by the planner, state by state 𝑧2. When both expect

12 

P. Fontanier

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

a realization 𝑧2 not to produce a financial crisis, marginal utilities are
equalized to 1, so the difference disappears. For the rest there are two
cases:  either  both  marginal  utilities  correspond  to  binding  collateral
constraints, either one agent expect the friction to bind and the other
not. The first case yields:

1
𝑐2(𝛺2, 𝜁 𝛺3)

−

=

1
𝑐2(0, 𝛺3)
1

(𝑧2 + 𝛺2)𝐻 −𝑑1(1 +𝑟1) +𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 +𝜁 𝛺3]

−

1

𝑧2𝐻 −𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) +𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 +𝛺3]
(A.12)

I take the first-order approximation around the REE 𝜆2 =  1∕(𝑧2𝐻 −
𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) + 𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3]) = 1∕𝑐2(0, 0). It gives:

1

(𝑧2 + 𝛺2)𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) + 𝜙𝐻E
1
+ 𝜙𝐻 𝜁 𝛺3
𝑐2(0,0)

1 + 𝛺2𝐻
𝑐2(0,0)

1
𝑐2(0, 0)

= 𝜆2

2[𝑧3 + 𝜁 𝛺3]
(

1 −

𝛺2𝐻 + 𝜙𝐻 𝜁 𝛺3
𝑐2(0, 0)

)

=

consequently be expressed state-by-state as:
[𝜆2(0; 𝛺3)(𝑧2 + 𝑞2(0; 𝛺3))

𝐻 (𝑧2) =



]
[𝜆2(𝛺2; 𝜁 𝛺3)(𝑧2 + 𝛺2 + 𝑞2(𝛺2; 𝜁 𝛺3))
]
−
(A.21)

As for leverage, it is sufficient to only look at states where the borrow-
ing constraint binds both in the expectation of the social planner and
of private agents. To the first-order, we can write:
)
(𝜆2(0; 𝛺3) − 𝜆2(𝛺2; 𝜁 𝛺3)(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

)
+𝜆𝑟
2

𝐻 (𝑧2) =

− 𝜁 𝛺3

(A.22)

− 𝛺2

1 +

𝛺3

(

(

)

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝛺2

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝛺3

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝛺3

The part 𝜆2(0; 𝛺3) − 𝜆2(𝛺2; 𝜁 𝛺3) exactly corresponds to the behavioral
wedge for leverage state-by-state, that we will denote by 
𝑑 (𝑧2) for con-
ciseness. The behavioral wedge for investment can thus be expressed
as:

(A.13)



𝐻 ≈ 𝛽E

1[

𝑑 (𝑧2)(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)1

𝜅2>0]

While the same algebra for the second part of Eq. (A.12) yields simi-
larly:

−𝛽 𝛺2

E

1[𝜆2(1 + (𝛽 − 𝜙)𝐻 𝑧3)1

𝜅2>0] + 𝛽(1 − 𝜁)E

1

1

𝑧2𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) + 𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3]

=

1
𝑐2(0, 0)
(

= 𝜆2

1 +

1
1 + 𝜙𝛺3𝐻
𝑐2(0,0)
)
𝜙𝐻 𝛺3
𝑐2(0, 0)

where 

𝑑 (𝑧2) = ((1 − 𝜁)𝛺3 − 𝛺2)𝜆2
2.

(A.14)

A.5.  Proof of Proposition 3

[
𝛺3𝜆2

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑧3

]

1

𝜅2>0

(A.23)

Taking the difference gives:
= 𝜆2
2

−

)

1
𝑐2(0, 𝛺3)

(𝐻 𝛺2 − (1 − 𝜁)𝜙𝐻 𝛺3

1
𝑐2(𝛺2, 𝜁 𝛺3)
Finally we do not need to study the part coming from the planner and
agents disagreeing about the occurrence of a crisis for a given 𝑧2 since
that effect is second-order: an infinitesimal difference integrated over
an infinitesimal band. It thus follows that, to the first order:

+ 𝜙𝐻(𝟏 − 𝜻)E

𝑑 ≃ −𝜴𝟐𝐻E

(A.15)

(A.16)

[
𝜴𝟑𝝀𝟐
𝟐

[
𝝀𝟐
𝟐

1

1

]

]

𝜅2>0

𝜅2>0

A.3.  Derivation of Eq. (27)

Totally  differentiating  the  equilibrium  pricing  equation  at 𝑡 =  2

E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3] + 𝛽 𝑐2𝑑 𝛺3 − 𝜙𝑑 𝑐2

yields:
E
2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3] + 𝜙(1 − 𝑐2)𝑑 𝛺3. (A.17)
𝑑 𝑞2 = 𝛽 𝑑 𝑐2
Then use the budget constraint, also totally differentiated, to get 𝑑 𝑐2 =
𝑑 𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻 𝑑 𝛺3. Combining these two conditions gives:
𝑑 𝑞2 = 𝛽(𝑑 𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻 𝑑 𝛺3)E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3] + 𝛽 𝑐2𝑑 𝛺3

−𝜙(𝑑 𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻 𝑑 𝛺3)E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3] + 𝜙(1 − 𝑐2)𝑑 𝛺3.

(A.18)
then  notice  that  by  assumption, 𝑑 𝛺3 = 𝑑 𝛺3∕𝑑 𝑞2𝑑 𝑞2.  Thus  rearranging
yields:
(

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞2

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞2

𝑑 𝑞2

1 − 𝛽 𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3]

− 𝛽 𝑐2

+𝜙2𝐻E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3]

(𝛽E

=

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3] − 𝜙E

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞2
2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3]

− 𝜙(1 − 𝑐2)
) 𝑑 𝑛2

and using 𝑐2 + 𝜙𝐻E
we end up with:
𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

=

(

1 −

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3]

(𝛽 − 𝜙)E
𝜙 + (𝛽 − 𝜙)(2𝑐2 − 𝑛2) 𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞2

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3] = 2𝑐2 − 𝑛2 through the budget constraint,

) .

(A.20)

A.4.  Behavioral wedge for investment

I  use  the  same  notation  as  for  the  proof  of Proposition  2,  pre-
sented  in Appendix  A.2.  The  behavioral  wedge  for  investment  can

13 

The proof of Proposition 3 is straightforward once the uninternal-
ized effects of leverage and investment have been derived. By assump-
tion,  the  planner  can  impose  taxes  or  subsidies  on  leverage,  on  the
creation of collaterals assets, and on the holdings of collateral assets,
which are rebated or funded lump-sum. Denote these taxes/subsidies
respectively by 𝜏𝑑 , 𝜏𝐻 and 𝜏𝑞. The budget constraint can be written:
𝑐1 + 𝑐(𝐻) + 𝜏ℎ𝐻 + 𝑞1ℎ ≤ 𝑒1 + 𝑑1(1 − 𝜏𝑑 ) + 𝑞1𝐻 + 𝜏𝑞ℎ
where 𝐻 is  the  amount  invested  and ℎ is  the  amount  kept  on  the
balance sheet. Of course in equilibrium ℎ = 𝐻.

(A.24)

1

]

= 0

[𝜆2

= 𝜆1(1 − 𝜏𝑑 ) − ̃E

The first-order conditions of private agents are given by:
𝜕
𝑏,0
𝜕 𝑑1
𝜕
𝑏,0
𝜕 𝐻
𝜕
𝑏,0
𝜕 ℎ

= 𝑐′(𝐻) + 𝜏𝐻 − 𝑞1 = 0

= 𝜆1𝑞1 + 𝜆1𝜏𝑞 − ̃E

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

= 0

1

(A.25)

(A.26)

(A.27)

The planner wants the agent to internalize the effects of leverage. This
is simply done with a tax equal to:

𝜏𝑑 = −



𝑑
𝜆1

For investment, the planer wants to fix the level of investment at a level
𝐻 such that:

𝑐′(𝐻) = 𝛽E
1

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

+ 𝛽E
1

[

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝜕 𝛺3
𝜕 𝑞2

( 𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝑛2

𝑧2 +

𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝐻

)]

(A.28)

(A.29)

(A.30)

the tax must simply be set equal to:

𝜏𝐻 = −


𝐻
𝜆1
1 the price at 𝑡 = 1 such that the reversal externality
Finally, denote by 𝑞∗
is equal to 0. This is the price the planner wants to set. We thus simply
want 𝜆1𝑞∗
̃E
1

= 0, so the tax should be set at:

1 + 𝜆1𝜏𝑞 − ̃E
]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)
1
− 𝜆1𝑞∗
1

(A.31)

(A.32)

𝜏𝑞 =

𝜆1

)

and because

𝛽E

]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

1

(A.19)

+ 𝛽E
1

= 𝛽 ̃E

[
𝜅2𝜙𝐻

( 𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝛺3
𝜕 𝑛2
𝜕 𝑞2
1[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)] − 
𝐻

𝑧2 +

)]

𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝐻

P. Fontanier

A.6.  Proof of Proposition 4

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Next, notice that any convex function satisfies this requirement. For

As explained in the main text, the social planner’s optimality con-

dition under the premises of Proposition 4 can be expressed as:

𝑢′(𝑐1) =

1
2𝜎𝛺

∫
0

∞

[

𝜎𝛺

∫

−𝜎𝛺

𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

(𝑑1, 𝐻; 𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2

) 𝑑 𝜔2

]

𝑑 𝐹2(𝑧2).

(A.33)

Key to this proposition is the shape of 𝜕
recall that:

2∕𝜕 𝑛2 with respect to 𝑧2. First



2 =

{

(𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻 ̃E
𝛽 ln
𝛽 (𝛽E[𝑧3]𝐻 + 𝑛2

)
2[𝑧3]
)

+ 𝛽2 (E[𝑧3]𝐻 − 𝜙𝐻 ̃E

2[𝑧3]∕𝛽)

{

so that the first derivative is equal to:
𝜕
if 𝑧2
2
𝜕 𝑛2
otherwise

𝛽 𝜆2
𝛽

≥ 𝑧∗

=

≥ 𝑧∗

if 𝑧2
otherwise

(A.34)

(A.35)

which is constant outside of a crisis, as expected. I use the following
notation to simplify the exposition of the proof. First, the expectation
over 𝑧2 for a given 𝑤2 is denoted by:
𝜕
2
𝑔(𝑤2) = ∫
𝜕 𝑛2

(𝑑1, 𝐻; 𝑞2, 𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2)𝑑 𝐹2(𝑧2)

(A.36)

+∞

0

while the integral taken over the uncertainty band is:

𝐺(𝜎𝛺) = ∫

+𝜎𝛺

−𝜎𝛺

𝑔(𝑤2)
2𝜎𝛺

𝑑 𝑤2.

(A.37)

Given the continuity of 𝜕
with respect to 𝜎𝛺:

𝐺′(𝜎𝛺) = −

1
2𝜎2
𝛺
+∞

∫

+ ∫

− ∫

0

0

+∞

+𝜎𝛺

−𝜎𝛺
𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2
𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

2∕𝜕 𝑛2 (see Eq. (A.34)) we can differentiate

+∞

∫

0

𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

(𝑑1, 𝐻; 𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2)𝑑 𝐹2(𝑧2)𝑑 𝑤2

(𝑑1, 𝐻; 𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜎𝛺)𝑑 𝐹2(𝑧2)

(𝑑1, 𝐻; 𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 + 𝜎𝛺)𝑑 𝐹2(𝑧2)

(A.38)

a convex function 𝜑, Jensen’s inequality yields:
𝜑(𝑡𝜎𝛺 − (1 − 𝑡)𝜎𝛺) ≤ 𝑡𝜑(𝜎𝛺) + (1 − 𝑡)𝜑(−𝜎𝛺)  ∀𝑡 ∈ [0, 1].

Now integrate this inequality over 𝑡 to get:

1

1

𝜑(𝑡𝜎𝛺 − (1 − 𝑡)𝜎𝛺)𝑑 𝑡 ≤

𝑡𝜑(𝜎𝛺)𝑑 𝑡 + ∫

∫

(1 − 𝑡)𝜑(−𝜎𝛺)𝑑 𝑡.

0
A change of variable 𝑡 → (𝑥−𝜎𝛺)∕(2𝜎𝛺) in the left-hand side thus yields:

0

0

(A.42)

(A.43)

(A.44)

+𝜎𝛺

𝜑(𝑥)
2𝜎𝛺

𝑑 𝑥 ≤

𝜑(𝜎𝛺) − 𝜑(−𝜎𝛺)
2

−𝜎𝛺
which is exactly the relationship in Eq. (A.41).

1

∫

∫

We now have to prove that 𝜕

2∕𝜕 𝑛2 is convex to end the proof of
Proposition 4. Going back to Eq. (A.34), denote 𝜕
2,𝑛. Given
Eq. (A.35), start with the derivative of marginal utility 𝑑 𝜆2∕𝑑 𝑧2 = −𝐻∕𝑐2
2,
and so 𝑑2 𝜆2∕𝑑 𝑧2
2𝐻 > 0, which concludes the proof for leverage.26 For
investment, the first order condition becomes:
𝜆1𝑐′(𝐻) =
[

2∕𝜕 𝑛2 by 

2 = 2∕𝑐3

]

∞

𝜎𝛺

𝜆2(𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2)(𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 −𝜔2 + 𝑞2(𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2))𝑑 𝜔2

𝑑 𝐹2(𝑧2).

1
2𝜎𝛺

∫
0

∫

−𝜎𝛺

(A.45)

Fortunately,  it  is  now  straightforward  to  sign  the  derivative  of  this
function given the previous proof for leverage. We know that 𝜆2(𝑧2 −
̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2) is convex in 𝜔2. This is multiplied by a linear and positive
function of 𝜔2 (the dividends), and then by the price realization at 𝑡 = 2.
The price at 𝑡 = 2 is given by:
𝑞2 = 𝛽(𝑛2 + 𝜙𝑀E

2[𝑧3] + 𝜙(1 − 𝑛2 − 𝜙𝑀E

2[𝑧3])E

2[𝑧3])E

(A.46)

2[𝑧3]

Which  is  clearly  linear  in 𝜔2 since  net  worth  is  linear  in 𝜔2: 𝑛2 =
(𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 − 𝜔2)𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1). Hence this function is convex in 𝜔2, which
implies that the right-hand side of the first-order condition is increasing
in uncertainty. This time, however, this means that 𝑐′(𝐻) in equilibrium
needs to be higher than in the decentralized equilibrium. Hence, uncer-
tainty calls for increasing investment. Intuitively, uncertainty increases
the stochastic discount factor that prices the asset, while keeping the
rest fixed, meaning that more consumption should be shifted to the
future.

which can be expressed in terms of the notation just defined above as:

𝐺′(𝜎𝛺) = −

𝐺(𝜎𝛺)
𝜎𝛺

+

1
2𝜎𝛺

(𝑔(𝜎𝛺) − 𝑔(−𝜎𝛺))

(A.39)

A.7. 𝛺3-Uncertainty

Before proceeding further, remember that the social planner optimally
sets leverage such that 𝑢′(𝑐1) = 𝐺(𝜎𝛺), while the decentralized equilib-
rium is independent of 𝜎𝛺. Thus, leverage restrictions are increasing in
𝜎𝛺 if and only if 𝐺 is increasing in 𝜎𝛺. This condition is then equivalent,
using the derivative just computed, to:
𝑔(𝜎𝛺) − 𝑔(−𝜎𝛺)
2

𝑑 𝑤2.

(A.40)

> ∫

+𝜎𝛺

𝑔(𝑤2)
2𝜎𝛺

−𝜎𝛺

Since 𝜕
2∕𝜕 𝑛2 is continuous in 𝑧 and in 𝜔2, and since 𝜔2 is defined in
the compact set [−𝜎𝛺, 𝜎𝛺], 𝑔 is continuous (by continuity of parametric
integrals) and Fubini’s theorem implies that a sufficient condition for
𝐺′(𝜎𝛺) > 0 is that:25
1
2

(𝑧2 + 𝜎𝛺) −

(𝑧2 − 𝜎𝛺)

( 𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

)

+𝜎𝛺

> ∫

−𝜎𝛺

𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

(𝑧2 + 𝜔2)

𝑑 𝜔2
2𝜎𝛺

∀𝑧2 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝(𝑓2).

(A.41)

In other words, this condition requires that the average taken over a
segment is below the average of the two extreme points of this same
segment.

This part extends the insights of Section 4.3 to the case where the
uncertainty pertains to 𝛺3. I start by studying the realization of only
one state of the world, and complete the proof using the linearity of
expectations.

I assume that for a given realization of 𝑧2, the planner has a uniform

distribution on sentiment during a crisis:
𝑤3 ∼  [ ̄𝛺3 − 𝜎𝛺, ̄𝛺3 + 𝜎𝛺
The integral (denoted by 𝐿) used by the social planner to compute the
marginal effect on welfare on increasing leverage becomes:

(A.47)

]

(𝑑1, 𝐻; 𝑞2, 𝑧2, ̄𝑧3 − ̄𝛺3 − 𝜔3

) 𝑑 𝜔3

(A.48)

𝐿 =

1
2𝜎𝛺

𝜎𝛺

∫

−𝜎𝛺

𝜕
2
𝜕 𝑛2

Assume first that for all realizations of 𝜔3 the resulting equilibrium is
a crisis one. This yields:
1
2𝜎𝛺

(A.49)

𝐿 =

𝜎𝛺

∫

1
𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻( ̄𝑧3 − ̄𝛺3 − 𝜔3)
[
ln(𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻( ̄𝑧3 − ̄𝛺3 − 𝜔3))

𝑑 𝜔3

]𝜎𝛺
−𝜎𝛺

⟹ 𝐿 = −

(A.50)

−𝜎𝛺
1
(2𝜎𝛺)𝜙𝐻

25

̄𝛺2 does  not  need  to  appear  in  this  condition  since  this  inequality  is
required to hold for all 𝑧2 in the support of the definition, so equivalently
for all 𝑧2 − ̄𝛺2 also in the support.

26 For the sake of brevity, 𝛺3 is left out of the expressions as, by assumption,
1[𝑧3] and that has no impact
it is a constant. It thus only shifts the value of ̃E
on the sign of these derivatives as long as ̃E
1[𝑧3] + 𝛺3 > 0, which we always
assume to be the case.

14 

P. Fontanier

⟹ 𝐿 =

1
(2𝜎𝛺)𝜙𝐻

ln

( 𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻( ̄𝑧3 − ̄𝛺3 + 𝜎𝛺)
𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻( ̄𝑧3 − ̄𝛺3 − 𝜎𝛺)

)

This is a function of the type:
( 𝐾 + 𝑥
𝐾 − 𝑥

𝑓 (𝑥) =

1
𝑥

ln

)

(A.51)

(A.52)

And we can show that this is increasing in 𝑥, for 𝑥 ∈ [0, 𝐾]. Indeed, the
derivative is given by:

𝑓 ′(𝑥) =

(𝐾 2 − 𝑥2) ln

)

( 𝐾+𝑥
𝐾−𝑥

+ 2𝐾 𝑥

𝑥2(𝐾 − 𝑥)(𝐾 + 𝑥)

(𝐾 2 − 𝑥2) ln

The denominator is clearly positive, but the denominator is indetermi-
nate. Take the derivative of the denominator:
)
( 𝐾 + 𝑥
)
𝑑
𝑑 𝑥
𝐾 − 𝑥
The denominator is thus increasing and its limit in 0 is 0. Hence, 𝑓 is
increasing on [0, 𝐾]. Accordingly, 𝐿 is increasing in 𝜎𝛺.

( 𝐾 + 𝑥
𝐾 − 𝑥

+ 2𝐾 𝑥 = 2𝑥 ln

(A.54)

> 0

Left now is the same calculation when for some parts of the uncer-
tainty set, the economy is outside of a crisis. Following the same steps
as before, this boils down to the study of:

( 1

)

𝑔(𝑥) =

1
𝑥

ln

𝐾 − 𝑥
Where the derivative is now:
− ln

)

( 1
𝐾−𝑥

𝑥
𝑎−𝑥

𝑔′(𝑥) =

𝑥2

And the derivative of the numerator is:
𝑑
𝑑 𝑥

𝑥
(𝑎 − 𝑥)2

𝑥
𝑎 − 𝑥

( 1

𝐾 − 𝑥

− ln

> 0

=

)

(A.53)

(A.55)

(A.56)

(A.57)

Since 𝑔′(0+) > 0, 𝑔 is increasing. Thus the same result applies. This
concludes the proof by linearity of expectations: since this integral is
increasing in 𝜎𝛺, all components  of the expectations over all future
states of the world are increasing, and it then follows that the overall
expectation is increasing in 𝜎𝛺.

A.8.  Reversal uncertainty

The analysis in Section 4.3 shows how the regulator should adapt
leverage  and  investment  regulations  in  the  face  of  sentiment  uncer-
tainty.  The  last  natural  question  is  how  price  regulation  (and  thus
the eventual use of interest rates) should be adapted. The following
proposition answers this interrogation unambiguously.

Proposition 5 (Reversal Uncertainty and Price Regulation). Assume that
inside  crises,  the  behavioral  bias  takes  the  form 𝛺3 = ̄𝛺3 − 𝛼𝑞𝑞1 with
̄𝛺3 a constant, and the planner believes that 𝛼 is uniformly distributed on
[ ̄𝛼𝑞 − 𝜎𝛼, ̄𝛼𝑞 + 𝜎𝛼], where ̄𝛼𝑞 and 𝜎𝛼 are positive constants. Then the optimal
interest rate at 𝑡 =  1 is increasing in uncertainty 𝜎𝛼 if the regulator has
access to unconstrained leverage and investment regulations.

This  proposition  formalizes  the  following  intuition:  the  regulator
fears that high prices today could translate into over-pessimism inside
a future crisis, but is unsure of the strength of the extrapolation. In
that situation, the more uncertainty there is around this extrapolation
mechanism, the more the regulator wants to lower prices in the boom.
This is once again coming from a similar convexity insight: cases where
the extrapolation parameter is strong are more costly because of the
non-linearities typically found in financial crises.

Proof. Using  the  premises  of Proposition  5 and  the  expressions  in
Proposition 1, we are interested in the behavior of:

1
2𝜎𝛼

̄𝛼𝑞 +𝜎𝛼

∫

̄𝛼𝑞 −𝜎𝛼

𝜅2(𝛼𝑞)𝛼𝑞𝑑 𝛼𝑞 = ∫

𝜎𝛼

−𝜎𝛼

(𝜆2(𝛼𝑞) − 1)𝛼𝑞𝑑 𝛼𝑞

(A.58)

when 𝜎𝛼 varies.  As  we  showed  in  the  proof  of Proposition  4 in

15 

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Appendix A.6, it is sufficient to show that the function (𝜆2(𝛼𝑞) − 1)𝛼𝑞
is convex in 𝛼𝑞 to prove that this integral is increasing in 𝜎𝛼. Using
𝜆2 = 1∕𝑐2 once again, we have:
𝑑
𝑑 𝛼

(
(𝜆2(𝛼𝑞) − 1)𝛼𝑞

= (𝜆2(𝛼𝑞) − 1) +

(A.59)

)

𝛼𝑞𝜙𝐻 𝑞1
𝑐2
2

)

=

differentiating once again:
𝑑2
𝑑 𝛼2
𝑞

(
(𝜆2(𝛼𝑞) − 1)𝛼𝑞

𝜙𝐻 𝑞1
𝑐2
2
and  all  those  terms  are  unambiguously  positive.  By  convexity  the
strength of the reversal externality is increasing in 𝜎𝛼. By Proposition 9,
this immediately requires a higher interest rate to satisfy Eq. (C.14). □

(𝜙𝐻 𝑞1)2
2𝑐3
2

𝜙𝐻 𝑞1
𝑐2
2

(A.60)

+ 𝛼𝑞

+

A.9.  Multiple equilibria

The analysis in the main paper as made under the assumption that
the equilibrium was unique at 𝑡 = 2 (see footnote 9). When sentiment
is exogenous, the uniqueness of the equilibrium is straightforward to
prove: the budget constraint directly pins down the consumption in
equilibrium. This in turn directly pins down the asset price, and the
equilibrium is unique.

Multiple equilibria can arise only when sentiment depends on asset
prices (see Jeanne and Korinek, 2019; Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2021).
With endogenous biases, the system of equation becomes:
𝑞2 = 𝛽 𝑐2
𝑐2 = 𝑧2𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) + 𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)] + 𝜙(1 − 𝑐2)E
E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)]

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)]

(A.61)

(A.62)

which makes it clear that, as long as 𝛺3 is strictly increasing in 𝑞2, dif-
ferent equilibrium levels of asset prices result in different equilibrium
levels of consumption. The asset price determination is given by:
𝑞2 = 𝛽 (𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻E
) E
+𝜙(1 −

)
)E
2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)]

(𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)]

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)]

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)]

(A.63)

Depending on the shape of 𝛺3(𝑞2), an arbitrary number of equilibria
are possible. I illustrate the problem with a linear function:
𝛺3(𝑞2) = 𝛼 𝑞2 + 𝜒

(A.64)

The price condition is now:
𝑞2 = 𝛽 (𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻E
+𝜙(1 −

(𝑛2 + 𝜙𝐻E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛼 𝑞2 + 𝜒]

2[𝑧3 + 𝛼 𝑞2 + 𝜒]

) E

)
)E
2[𝑧3 + 𝛼 𝑞2 + 𝜒]

2[𝑧3 + 𝛼 𝑞2 + 𝜒]

(A.65)

This is a quadratic equation, hence will have at most two solutions
(it can also only have one solution if the intersection gives a 𝑐2 = 1,
in which case the constraint is not binding). Only one of them will
however  be  stable:  since  the  consumption  equation  is  linear  in 𝑞2,
𝑑 𝑐2∕𝑑 𝑞2 as computed along the pricing equation is necessarily below
the slope of the budget constraint on one of the two equilibria. How
more  complicated  forms  of  biases  interact  with  frictions  to  create
multiple equilibria is left for future work.

Appendix B.  Alternative collateral constraint with current prices

This section shows the robustness of my results when, instead, we

consider a collateral constraint of the form:

𝑑2

≤ 𝜙𝐻 𝑞2.

(B.1)

Financial amplification comes into play because the consumption level
𝑐2 that prices the asset directly depends on the price of the asset through
the collateral constraint (with ℎ = 𝐻 in equilibrium):
𝑐2 = 𝑧2𝐻 − 𝑑1(1 + 𝑟1) + 𝜙𝐻 𝑞2.

(B.2)

P. Fontanier

A fall in the price of the risky asset tightens the budget constraint even
more, thus leading the price to fall further as a result of stronger dis-
counting, and so on. Asset price and consumption are then determined
in general equilibrium according to the fixed-point:
𝑞2 = 𝛽 𝑐2(𝑞2)E

2[𝑧3 + 𝛺3(𝑞2)] + 𝜙𝑞2(1 − 𝑐2(𝑞2)).

(B.3)

Proposition 1 now takes the following – extremely similar – form.

Proposition  6 (Uninternalized  Effects  with 𝜙𝐻 𝑞2). The  uninternalized
first-order impact on welfare, when infinitesimally varying one aggregate
variable while keeping the others constant, when the collateral constraint
has current prices in it, are given by:

(i) For short-term debt 𝑑1:



𝑑 =

( ̃E

1[𝜆2] − E

)
1[𝜆2]

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑

− E

[

]

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

1

𝜅2𝜙𝐻
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑

.

(B.4)

(ii) For investment in collateral assets 𝐻:
]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)

(𝛽E
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐻

− 𝜆1𝑞1

𝐻 =



)

1

+ 𝛽E
1

[

)]

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

( 𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐻

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝐻

𝑧2 +

(iii) And for prices 𝑞1:
𝑞 = 𝛽E
1

𝜙𝜅2𝐻



[

]

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝛺3

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞1

(B.5)

(B.6)

As in the core of the paper, an infinitesimal perturbation around the

REE is enlightening (assuming 𝛺2 and 𝛺3 are small state-by-state):

Proposition 7 (Behavioral Wedge Approximation). If 𝛺2 and 𝛺3 are small
state-by-state, the behavioral wedges can be expressed as:
𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

+ 𝜙𝐻(𝟏 − 𝜻)E[𝜴𝟑𝝀𝟐
𝟐

𝑑 ≃ −𝜴𝟐𝐻E

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑧3

𝜅2>0].

1 + 𝜙

𝜅2>0

𝝀𝟐
𝟐

(

)



1

1

]

[



𝐻 = 𝛽E
1

[

]
𝑑 (𝑧2)(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)
[

+ 𝛽(1 − 𝜁)E
1

𝜆𝑟
2𝛺3

− 𝛽 𝛺2

E

1

]

1

𝜅2>0

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑧3

[

𝜆𝑟
2

(

1 +

)

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑧2

]

1

𝜅2>0

(B.7)

(B.8)

𝑑 (𝑧2) is the behavioral wedge for leverage for a realization 𝑧2 of the

where 
dividend process at 𝑡 = 2:

(



𝑑 (𝑧2) = 𝛺2𝜆2
2

𝐻 𝛺2 + 𝜙

)

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

1

𝜅2>0 − 𝜙𝐻(1 − 𝜁)𝛺3𝜆2

2

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑧3

1

𝜅2>0.

(B.9)

As can readily be seen from this expression, all the intuitions are
preserved  with  this  collateral  constraint:  the  comovement  of  future
sentiment with the health of the financial sector, and the necessary
interaction with financial frictions. The new terms are simply coming
from the fact that an error in the expectation of dividends directly spills
over expected consumption, through the level of asset prices at 𝑡 = 2.27
Proposition 4 also still holds exactly in the same way, although the

proof is more involved.28

27 The price sensitivity is slightly different, because irrationality at 𝑡 = 2,
represented by 𝛺3, influences equilibrium asset prices:
[𝑧3 + 𝜴𝟑
𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2
]
) + 2𝜙2𝐻 𝑞2 − 𝑐2𝛽 𝑑𝜴𝟑
𝑑 𝑞2

𝛽E
2
[𝑧3 + 𝜴𝟑

1 − 𝛽 𝜙𝐻(E
2

(B.10)

− 𝜙𝑞2

=

]

.

28 This is because the price in the collateral constraint introduces additional
curvature. The proof is omitted for space constraints but can also be found

16 

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Appendix C.  Monetary policy as price regulation

I start by introducing rigidities in order for monetary policy devi-
ations to have potential costs.29 Because aggregate demand is not the
focus on this paper, this is done by following Farhi and Werning (2020):
households supply labor and output is demand-determined at 𝑡 = 1 by
assuming wages are fully rigid.30 Households now have the following
utility function:

[(

𝑈 ℎ = ̃E

1

ln(𝑐ℎ

1 ) − 𝜈

)

𝑙1+𝜂
1
(1 + 𝜂)

+ 𝛽 𝑐ℎ

2 + 𝛽2𝑐ℎ

3

]

(C.11)

which introduces curvature in consumption utility, and labor disutility
in period 𝑡 = 1. Firms produce using labor linearly, 𝑌1 = 𝑙1. Wages are
fully rigid and normalized to 1, causing workers to be potentially off
their labor supply curve. This creates a role for monetary policy: the
central bank can close the output gap by choosing the nominal rate
of interest that brings workers back to their labor supply curve. The
𝑙𝜂
labor wedge 𝜇1 =  1 − 𝜈 𝑐ℎ
1 quantifies how far off are workers from
1
their optimality condition. The labor wedge is positive when there is
underemployment, and negative when there is overheating. Perfectly
achieving  natural  employment  means  that 𝜇1 =  0.  Finally,  Pareto
weights are simply taken to be equal to the marginal utility of each
type of agent at 𝑡 = 1, in order to sidestep redistribution concerns.

A  change  in  the  nominal  interest  works  through  five  different
channels: (i) traditional aggregate demand; (ii) credit; (iii) investment;
(iv) current beliefs and (v) future beliefs. We can once again leverage
the prior general welfare analysis.

Proposition  8 (Welfare  Effects  of  Monetary  Policy). The  total  welfare
effects, as evaluated through the central bank’s expectations, of an infinites-
imal interest rate can be expressed by:
𝑑
𝑑 𝐻
𝑑 𝑟1
𝑑 𝑟1
𝐻
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
(𝑖𝑖𝑖)
)

𝑑 𝑑1

𝑑 𝑟1
𝑑
⏟⏟⏟
(𝑖𝑖)

𝑑 𝑌1
𝜇1
𝑑 𝑟1
⏟⏟⏟
(𝑖)



=

+

+

]

1

+

𝑑 𝑞1
𝑑 𝑟1

( 𝑑 𝑑1
𝑑 𝛺2

𝑑 𝛺2
𝑑 𝑞1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
(𝑖𝑣)

𝑑 𝐻
𝑑 𝛺2

𝑑 +





𝐻

+

𝛽E
1

[
𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝑑 𝑞1
𝑑 𝑟1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
(𝑣)

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞1

(C.12)

𝑑 +

𝑑 = 

𝐻 = 

where 
𝑑 , the sum of the behavioral wedge and the collateral ex-
ternality for leverage, and 
𝐻 +
𝐻 , the sum of the behavioral wedge
and the collateral externality for investment. The last term is proportional
to 

𝑞, the reversal externality (see Section 3 for details).
If  the  monetary  authority  is  able  to  perfectly  close  the  output
gap and bring the economy to full employment, then it can achieve
𝜇1 =  0 (and  the  perturbation  is  taken  around  the  natural  rate).  As
mentioned  earlier,  there  is  thus  no  first-order  costs  from  deviating
slightly from perfect inflation targeting. This expression thus embodies
the idea in Stein (2021) that financial stability concerns loom large

in Fontanier (January 2022).
29 The proposal to use interest rate hikes to act early has been central to
the policy debate on asset bubbles, even though it has often been resisted
by policy makers (Greenspan, 2002; Bernanke, 2002). Bernanke and Gertler
(2000) show in a conventional model that asset prices are relevant to monetary
policy only to the extent that they may signal inflationary pressures. Woodford
(2012) complements this analysis by demonstrating that if the probability of a
financial crisis increases with the output gap, it may be necessary to conduct
tighter policy. Gourio et al. (2018) study this problem quantitatively when the
probability depends on the amount of inefficient credit. Barlevy (2022) shows
that this may backfire if the boom is driven by a ‘‘speculation shock’’.
30 In Farhi and Werning (2020), there is an aggregate demand externality
because wages are also fully rigid at 𝑡 = 2, when the economy hits the ZLB. In
my model there is no ZLB at 𝑡 = 2, thus no aggregate demand externality. The
results in this section are thus complementary to those in Farhi and Werning
(2020), and do not rely on the inability of the central bank to lower rates
sufficiently in crises.

P. Fontanier

when unemployment is low (𝜇1 close to zero), and should be negligible
when unemployment is extremely high (𝜇1 strongly positive).



𝑑 𝐻
𝑑 𝑟1

This, however, does not necessarily imply that leaning against the
wind is always desirable when the output gap can be closed, however.
To see why, take the extreme case where the financial authority is able
to adapt its leverage restrictions perfectly such that 
𝑑 = 0, and look
at the simpler case where 𝑑 𝛺3∕𝑑 𝑞1 = 𝑑 𝛺2∕𝑑 𝑞1 = 0 such that channels
(𝑖𝑣) and (𝑣) disappear. The welfare effects are thus now given in this
special case by:
𝑑
1
𝑑 𝑟1
because investment is unambiguously decreasing in the interest rate
𝑟1, tightening is desirable only if 
𝐻 < 0, i.e. if the uninternalized
welfare effects of marginally increasing the creation of collateral assets
is negative. As fully explained in Section 3.3, this object is actually pos-
itive for small belief deviations and becomes negative only if irrational
exuberance is large enough. In other words the central bank would only
pursue leaning against the wind when facing large enough behavioral
distortions.31

(C.13)

=

𝐻

Notice  from  Eq.  (C.12) that  the  ability  of  the  central  bank  to
improve financial stability largely depends on the reaction of beliefs
to policy. Without the belief channels (iv) and (v), the potential effi-
cacy of leaning against the wind rests on the ability to curb leverage
directly by raising rates, 𝑑 𝑑1∕𝑑 𝑟1. As emphasized by Werning (2015)
and Farhi and Werning (2020), this is not a robust prediction of these
models: it varies with the initial debt position as well as the shape of
the utility function. To the contrary, the fact that increasing interest
rates  has  a  negative  impact  on  asset  prices  is  unambiguous  in  our
models and is supported by robust empirical evidence (see e.g. Rigobon
and Sack, 2004 and Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005). Thus if 𝛺2 or 𝛺3
depend  directly  on  asset  prices,  leaning  against  the  wind  can  have
first-order benefits, by providing a supplementary instrument affecting
equilibrium prices, and not only real allocations at 𝑡 = 1.32

These results also directly speak to the debate about time-varying
macroprudential tools. A common argument for using monetary policy
to rein in financial excess is that, practically, macroprudential policy
cannot  be  quickly  adapted  to  be  synchronized  in  real-time  (Stein,
2021). Inspecting Proposition 8, however, suggests that this is only part
of the story. To focus on this question, assume: (i) fully unconstrained
counter-cyclical  capital  regulation  and  (ii)  fully  unconstrained  LTV
regulation.  Despite  these  assumptions,  monetary  policy  still  has  an
effect through prices and future behavioral biases.

Proposition 9 (Monetary Policy as Complement). When policymakers have
access  to  unconstrained  leverage  and  investment  taxes,  welfare  changes
evaluated around the equilibrium with optimal taxes are given by:
𝑑
𝑑 𝛺3
1
𝑑 𝑞1
𝑑 𝑟1

𝜇1 + 𝛽E

𝑑 𝑌1
𝑑 𝑟1

𝑑 𝑞1
𝑑 𝑟1

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

(C.14)

=

]

[

1

.

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

a possible crisis – a new channel for monetary policy. Furthermore,
such  action  does  not  necessarily  require  information  about  contem-
poraneous  biases.  A  sharp  increase  in  asset  prices  could  be  entirely
due  to  fundamentals,  but  the  planner  can  still  have  an  incentive  to
make prices deviate from their rational value today to prevent irrational
distress from happening. Finally, implementing such a policy allows for
financial regulation to be adapted and relaxed. Indeed, by acting pre-
ventively the central bank makes the future realizations of pessimism
less severe, thus directly reducing the size of behavioral wedge and of
the collateral externality. Taking this into account leads the optimal
macroprudential limit to be less strict, which raises welfare.33

Finally,  notice  how  the  sophistication  parameter 𝜁 is  naturally
absent of Proposition 9. Sophisticated financial intermediaries realize
very well that a high price today will translate into over-pessimism and
tight collateral constraints in a future crisis, but cannot coordinate to
reduce their buying pressure in order to cool off asset prices.

Proof of Propositions 8 and 9. The welfare function for the planner
is given by:



1 = 𝛷ℎE

1

(
ln

[

𝑐ℎ
1 − 𝜈

]

𝑙1+𝜂
1
1 + 𝜂

+𝛽 𝑐ℎ

2 +𝛽2𝑐ℎ

3

)

+𝛷𝑏E

(
ln(𝑐1) +𝛽 ln(𝑐2) +𝛽2𝑐3

)

1

(C.15)

where 𝛷ℎ and 𝛷𝑏 are the Pareto weights attached to each group by
the planner. In equilibrium, we have 𝑌1 = 𝑙1 by assumption of linear
production. We thus write utility of households at 𝑡 = 1 as:

 ℎ

1 = ln

𝑐ℎ
1 − 𝜈

+ 𝛽 𝑐ℎ

2 + 𝛽2𝑐ℎ
3 .

(C.16)

[

]

𝑌 1+𝜂
1
1 + 𝜂

Households’  welfare  is  affected  by  two  effects:  first,  a  change  n 𝑟1
changes the incentives for savings, forcing agents to substitute wealth
across periods. Second, it changes output and thus consumption and
labor  supply  levels.  However,  since  households  are  on  their  Euler
equation at 𝑡 = 1, the first effect is exactly 0:
𝑑 ℎ
𝑑 𝑐ℎ
𝑑 𝑐ℎ
𝑌1
1
1
1
1 − 𝛽 ̃E
𝜆ℎ
𝑑 𝑟1
𝑑 𝑟1
𝑑 𝑟1
𝑑 𝑟1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Euler=0

1 − 𝜈 𝑌 𝜂
𝜆ℎ

𝑌1
𝑑 𝑟1

𝜆ℎ
1 +

(C.17)

=

1

1

.

Next, the change in the interest rate have an impact on the borrowing
of financial intermediaries. This is not zero as for households, because
of the uninternalized effects explored in Section 3. It also has an impact
on investment, which for the same reason is not zero in general. Finally,
it has an impact on prices, which can spill over on sentiment. Because
Pareto weights are chosen such as 𝛷𝑗 = 1∕𝜆𝑗
1, we simply end up with:
𝑑
𝑑 𝑑1
1
𝑑 𝑟1
𝑑 𝑟1
( 𝑑 𝑑1
𝑑 𝛺2

𝑑 𝑌1
𝑑 𝑟1
𝑑 𝛺2
𝑑 𝑞1

]
𝑑 𝑞1
(C.18)
𝑑 𝑟1

𝑑 𝛺3
𝑑 𝑞1

𝑑 𝐻
𝑑 𝛺2

+ E
1

𝑑 𝑞1
𝑑 𝑟1

𝑑 𝐻
𝑑 𝑟1

𝜇1 +

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝑑 +

𝑑 +









)

=

+

[

𝐻

𝐻

This particular case calls for leaning against the wind in order to
lower current asset  prices,  which  will  then  cure future pessimism  in

31 My framework also abstracts from other considerations that could argue
against tightening in such a situation. See Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2019)
and Drechsler  et  al. (2022)  for  cases  where  leaning  against  the  wind  can
backfire.
32 In this paper I only consider biases that directly depend on asset prices
or fundamentals. A more general formulation could allow for biases that are
only function of the risk-premium or the risk-free rate separately. The role
of  monetary  policy  could  then  be  different  depending  on  its  transmission
mechanism  (Drechsler  et  al., 2018a; Drechsler  et  al., 2018b).  In  practice,
the bulk of the effect of monetary policy comes from changes in the equity
premium (Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005). Understanding whether price extrap-
olation is differentially affected by different monetary policy channels is an
open (and empirical) question.

Proposition 9 then follows directly from noticing that, when lever-
age and investment are set at the second-best level, terms (ii)-(iii)-(iv)
in Eq. (C.12) are zero by definition. □

Appendix D.  Belief heterogeneity

This  section  studies  the  case  where  lenders  and  borrowers  have
different beliefs about the distribution of future payoffs. This allows
me to connect my results to the literature on belief disagreement as a
contributing factor to boom-bust cycles (Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003

33 Evidently,  this  policy  problem  is  also  plagued  with  uncertainty.
Appendix  A.8 shows  that  the  incentives  to  tighten  monetary  policy  are
increasing in the uncertainty around the strength of the reversal force.

17 

P. Fontanier

; Geanakoplos, 2010; Simsek, 2013; Caballero and Simsek, 2020b), as
well as highlighting whose beliefs actually matter for welfare.

D.1.  Setup and notation

(D.1)

Agents of type 𝑖, with 𝑖 ∈ {ℎ, 𝑏}, hold subjective beliefs about the
𝑡 . As before,

aggregate state of the world at 𝑡, given by distributions ̃𝐹 𝑖
the deviations are encoded in scalars 𝛺𝑖
𝑡:
̃𝐹 𝑖
𝑡 (𝑧) = 𝐹𝑡(𝑧 − 𝛺𝑖
𝑡)
We also introduce two sophistication parameters: how bankers form
beliefs  about  their  future  beliefs,  and  how  they  form  beliefs  about
future households’ beliefs.34 At time 𝑡 = 1, bankers believe that agents
of type 𝑖 at 𝑡 =  2 will form expectations about 𝑧3 according to the
following distorted probability distribution:
̃𝐹 𝑖
3,𝜁 𝑖 (𝑧) = 𝐹3(𝑧 − 𝜁 𝑖 ⋅ 𝛺𝑖
𝑡)
For instance, 𝜁 𝑏 = 1 and 𝜁 ℎ = 0 means that bankers are fully sophisti-
cated about their future beliefs (they understand that their expectation
of 𝑧2 in period 𝑡 = 2 will be biased by 𝛺3) but they are fully naive about
future households (they think that households will form expectations
about 𝑧3 in a rational way).

(D.2)

Although households in my framework are passive and only extend
funds to intermediaries, their beliefs are crucial at time 𝑡 = 2. This is
because the tightness of the collateral constraint directly depends on
their beliefs about the collateral since they are lending up to (what they
believe is) the default incentive:
2[𝑧3 + 𝛺ℎ
3 ]

𝑑2
The rest of the model is fully identical. I will use ̃E𝑖 for the expectation
operator under the beliefs of agents of type 𝑖.

≤ 𝜙𝐻E

(D.3)

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Notice, however, that the equilibrium price 𝑞1 depends on almost all
behavioral factors. First, the expected 𝜆2 depends on 𝛺𝑏
3 : net
worth in period 2 depends on dividend payments, and consumption
depends on the tightness of the collateral constraint. Second, 𝑞2 also
depends on 𝜁 𝑏𝛺𝑏
3: the beliefs of bankers in the intermediate period are
the ones pricing the risky asset.

2 and 𝜁 ℎ𝛺ℎ

Asset  price. The  uninternalized  first-order  impact  on  welfare,  when
varying 𝑞1, is given by:
]
[
𝒅 𝜴𝒉
𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟏

𝑞 = 𝛽E

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

(D.7)



1

.

D.3.  Discussion

Two  broad  lessons  emerge  from  this  analysis.  First,  during  the
boom, the beliefs of borrowers (intermediaries in this framework) are
what should be monitored by the regulator. But second, during the bust,
the beliefs of lenders are what matter since they determine the tightness
of the collateral constraint. In particular, for the reversal and collateral
externalities to appear, the belief distortions of lenders must be direct
functions of equilibrium prices.

This does not imply that the beliefs of borrowers during financial
crises are irrelevant, nonetheless. Remember, from (D.4), (D.6), and
(D.7), that all these externalities are greater in magnitude when 𝜅2,
i.e. when the collateral constraint is tighter. This happens in particular
when 𝛺ℎ
3 is very negative (excessive pessimism from households). But
𝛺ℎ
3 depends on 𝑞2, which itself reflects the beliefs of intermediaries in
the bust, 𝛺𝑏
2 (since they are the marginal pricers of the asset). In other
words, both types of irrational pessimism contribute to the severity of
the crisis, but the endogeneity of the beliefs of households are what
determine the existence of these novel externalities.35

D.2.  Welfare propositions

Data availability

(D.4)

Leverage. Under  this  framework  of  heterogeneous  beliefs,  the  unin-
ternalized  first-order  impact  on  welfare,  when  varying 𝑑1,  is  given
by:



𝑑 =

( ̃E𝑏
)
1[𝜆2] − E
1[𝜆2]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑

[

− E

1

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

]

𝒅 𝜴𝒉
𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟐

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑
Relative to Proposition 1, the behavioral wedge is determined by the
difference with the belief of intermediaries, but the collateral external-
ity depends on the belief distortion of households. This is because it
is the over-borrowing of intermediaries that is problematic (who are
subject to a constraint, while households have linear utility so their
consumption smoothing is irrelevant) but the tightness of the constraint
depends on 𝛺ℎ
3 .

The beliefs of households do enter the behavioral wedge indirectly,
nevertheless.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  following  approximation,  the
counterpart of Proposition 2:
[

𝝀𝟐
𝟐

+ 𝜙𝐻(𝟏 − 𝜻 𝒉)E

𝑑 ≃ −𝜴𝒃

[
𝜴𝒉

𝟐𝐻E

(D.5)

𝟑 𝝀𝟐

1

1

𝜅2>0

𝜅2>0

]

]

𝟐

Investment. The  uninternalized  first-order  impact  on  welfare,  when
varying 𝐻, is given by:



𝐻 =

(𝛽E
]
[𝜆2(𝑧2 + 𝑞2)
− 𝜆1𝑞1
1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐻

)

[

+ 𝛽E
1

𝜅2𝜙𝐻

𝒅 𝜴𝒉
𝟑
𝒅 𝒒𝟐

( 𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝑛2

𝑧2 +

𝑑 𝑞2
𝑑 𝐻

)]

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐻

(D.6)

34 It turns out that the sophistication level of households is irrelevant in my
framework. I thus do not introduce new parameters to keep the notation as
light as possible.

Optimal Policy for Behavioral Financial Crises (Original data) (Mende-
ley Data).

References

Barberis,  N.,  2018.  Psychology-based  models  of  asset  prices  and  trading  volume.
In: Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, vol. 1,
Elsevier, pp. 79–175.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., 2003. Style investing. J. Financ. Econ. 68 (2), 161–199.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment. J. Financ.

Barlevy, G., 2022. On speculative frenzies and stabilization policy. FRB of Chicago

Bastianello, F., Fontanier, P., 2024. Partial equilibrium thinking, extrapolation, and

Econ. 49 (3), 307–343.

Working Paper.

bubbles. Working Paper.

Bernanke, B.S., 2002. Asset-price "bubbles" and monetary policy. Speech before the

New York Chapter of the National Association for Business Economic.

Bernanke, B.S., Gertler, M., 2000. Monetary policy and asset price volatility. Working

Paper.

Bernanke,  B.S.,  Kuttner,  K.N.,  2005.  What  explains  the  stock  market’s  reaction  to

Federal Reserve policy? J. Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257.

Bianchi, J., 2011. Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle. Amer.

Econ. Rev. 101 (7), 3400–3426.

Bianchi, F., Ilut, C., Saijo, H., 2024. Diagnostic business cycles. Rev. Econ. Stud. 91

(1), 129–162.

35 Note that, in the alternative case where the collateral constraint depends
on current equilibrium prices, only the beliefs of intermediaries would matter:
the belief of households would not have any impact, since they would value
the collateral at its market price. While a general analysis of this interaction
between disagreement and financial frictions is outside of the scope this paper,
this suggests that the choice of micro-foundations is not innocuous in such
settings.

18 

P. Fontanier

Journal of Financial Economics 166 (2025) 104005 

Bianchi, J., Mendoza, E.G., 2018. Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy. J.

Haddad, V., Muir, T., 2021. Do intermediaries matter for aggregate asset prices?. J.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., La Porta, R., Shleifer, A., 2019. Diagnostic expectations and

Hart,  O.D.,  1975.  On  the  optimality  of  equilibrium  when  the  market  structure  is

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Ma, Y., Shleifer, A., 2020. Overreaction in macroeconomic

He, Z., Kelly, B., Manela, A., 2017. Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Porta, R.L., Shleifer, A., 2024. Belief overreaction and stock

He, Z., Khang, I.G., Krishnamurthy, A., 2010. Balance sheet adjustments during the

Polit. Econ. 126 (2), 588–634.

stock returns. J. Finance 74 (6), 2839–2874.

expectations. Amer. Econ. Rev. 110 (9), 2748–2782.

market puzzles. J. Polit. Econ. 132 (5), 1450–1484.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2018. Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. Amer. Econ. Rev. 103 (2),

Borio, C.E., Lowe, P.W., 2002. Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring

Hong, H., Stein, J.C., 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and

Finance 76 (6), 2719–2761.

incomplete. J. Econom. Theory 11 (3), 418–443.

many asset classes. J. Financ. Econ. 126 (1), 1–35.

2008 crisis. IMF Econ. Rev. 58 (1), 118–156.

732–770.

overreaction in asset markets. J. Finance 54 (6), 2143–2184.

approach. J. Monetary Econ. 107, 2–17.

Brainard, W.C., 1967. Uncertainty and the effectiveness of policy. Am. Econ. Rev. 57

Jeanne, O., Korinek, A., 2019. Managing credit booms and busts: A Pigouvian taxation

Caballero, R.J., Krishnamurthy, A., 2003. Excessive dollar debt: Financial development

Jordà, Ò., Schularick, M., Taylor, A.M., 2015. Leveraged bubbles. J. Monetary Econ.

J. Finance 73 (1), 199–227.

the nexus. BIS working paper.

(2), 411–425.

and underinsurance. J. Finance 58 (2), 867–893.

Caballero, R.J., Simsek, A., 2020a. Prudential monetary policy. MIT Working Paper.
Caballero,  R.J.,  Simsek,  A.,  2020b.  A  risk-centric  model  of  demand  recessions  and

76, S1–S20.

Palgrave Macmillan.

speculation. Q. J. Econ. 135 (3), 1493–1566.

Claessens,  M.S.,  2014.  An  overview  of  macroprudential  policy  tools.  IMF  Working

Paper.

Dávila,  E.,  Korinek,  A.,  2018.  Pecuniary  externalities  in  economies  with  financial

frictions. Rev. Econ. Stud. 85 (1), 352–395.

Dávila, E., Walther, A., 2023. Prudential policy with distorted beliefs. Am. Econ. Rev.

113 (7), 1967–2006.

DeLong, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1990. Positive feedback
investment  strategies  and  destabilizing  rational  speculation.  J.  Finance  45  (2),
379–395.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2018a. Liquidity, risk premia, and the financial

transmission of monetary policy. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ. 10, 309–328.

Drechsler,  I.,  Savov,  A.,  Schnabl,  P.,  2018b.  A  model  of  monetary  policy  and  risk

premia. J. Finance 73 (1), 317–373.

Kindleberger, C.P., 1978. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.

Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Econ. 105 (2), 211–248.
Krishnamurthy,  A.,  Li,  W.,  2024.  Dissecting  mechanisms  of  financial  crises:  Inter-
mediation  and  sentiment.  J.  Political  Econ. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/733423,
(forthcoming).

L’Huillier, J.-P., Singh, S.R., Yoo, D., 2024. Incorporating diagnostic expectations into

the New Keynesian framework. Rev. Econ. Stud. 91 (5), 3013–3046.

Lorenzoni, G., 2008. Inefficient credit booms. Rev. Econ. Stud. 75 (3), 809–833.
Martin, A., Ventura, J., 2016. Managing credit bubbles. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 14 (3),

753–789.

Martinez-Miera, D., Repullo, R., 2019. Monetary policy, macroprudential policy, and

financial stability. Annu. Rev. Econ. 11, 809–832.

Maxted, P., 2024. A macro-finance model with sentiment. Rev. Econ. Stud. 91 (1),

438–475.

McCarthy,  O.,  Hillenbrand,  S.,  2022.  Heterogeneous  investors  and  stock  market

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2022. How monetary policy shaped the housing

fluctuations. Working Paper.

boom. J. Financ. Econ. 144 (3), 992–1021.

Mendoza, E.G., 2010. Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage. Amer. Econ. Rev.

Fanelli, S., Straub, L., 2021. A Theory of Foreign Exchange Interventions. Rev. Econ.

100 (5), 1941–1966.

Farhi, E., Gabaix, X., 2020. Optimal taxation with behavioral agents. Amer. Econ. Rev.

Stud. 88 (6), 2857–2885.

110 (1), 298–336.

Minsky, H.P., 1977. The financial instability hypothesis: An interpretation of keynes

and an alternative to ‘‘standard’’ theory. Challenge 20 (1), 20–27.

Nagel, S., Xu, Z., 2024. Movements in Yields, not the Equity Premium: Bernanke-Kuttner

Farhi, E., Werning, I., 2016. A theory of macroprudential policies in the presence of

Redux. Technical Report, Working paper.

nominal rigidities. Econometrica 84 (5), 1645–1704.

Farhi, E., Werning, I., 2020. Taming a minsky cycle. Working Paper.
Fisher, I., 1932. Booms and Depressions: Some First Principles. Adelphi Company New

Rabin,  M.,  Vayanos,  D.,  2010.  The  gambler’s  and  hot-hand  fallacies:  Theory  and

applications. Rev. Econ. Stud. 77 (2), 730–778.

Rigobon, R., Sack, B., 2004. The impact of monetary policy on asset prices. J. Monetary

Fontanier, P., January 2022. Optimal Policy for Behavioral Financial Crises. Harvard

Rognlie, M., Shleifer, A., Simsek, A., 2018. Investment hangover and the great recession.

York.

University Working Paper.

Geanakoplos, J., 2010. The leverage cycle. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 24 (1), 1–66.
Geanakoplos, J.D., Polemarchakis, H.M., 1985. Existence, regularity, and constrained
suboptimality of competitive allocations when the asset market is incomplete. In:
Cowles Foundation Discussion Papers, vol. 764, Cowles Foundation for Research in
Economics, Yale University.

Geithner, T.F., 2014. Stress Test: Reflections on Financial Crises. Broadway Books.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2018. A Crisis of Beliefs. Princeton University Press.
Gorton, G., 2012. Misunderstanding Financial Crises: Why We Don’t See Them Coming.

Gorton, G., Metrick, A., 2012. Securitized banking and the run on repo. J. Financ.

Oxford University Press.

Econ. 104 (3), 425–451.

IMF Econ. Rev. 66 (1), 70–115.

Greenspan, A., 2002. Economic volatility. In: Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan at
a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Jackson Hole,
Wyoming.

Greenwald,  B.C.,  Stiglitz,  J.E.,  1986.  Externalities  in  economies  with  imperfect

information and incomplete markets. Q. J. Econ. 101 (2), 229–264.

Greenwood,  R.,  Hanson,  S.G.,  Jin,  L.J.,  2019.  Reflexivity  in  credit  markets.  NBER

Greenwood, R., Hanson, S.G., Shleifer, A., Sørensen, J.A., 2022. Predictable financial

Greenwood, R., Shleifer, A., 2014. Expectations of returns and expected returns. Rev.

Working Paper.

crises. J. Finance 77 (2), 863–921.

Financ. Stud. 27 (3), 714–746.

Econ. 51 (8), 1553–1575.

Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 10 (2), 113–153.

Scheinkman, J.A., Xiong, W., 2003. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. J. Polit.

Econ. 111 (6), 1183–1220.

Schmitt-Grohé, S., Uribe, M., 2016. Downward nominal wage rigidity, currency pegs,

and involuntary unemployment. J. Polit. Econ. 124 (5), 1466–1514.

Schmitt-Grohé,  S.,  Uribe,  M.,  2021.  Multiple  equilibria  in  open  economies  with

collateral constraints. Rev. Econ. Stud. 88 (2), 969–1001.

Schularick, M., Taylor, A.M., 2012. Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage
cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008. Amer. Econ. Rev. 102 (2), 1029–1061.

Shiller, R.J., 2015. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press.
Shleifer,  A.,  Vishny,  R.W.,  1992.  Liquidation  values  and  debt  capacity:  A  market

equilibrium approach. J. Finance 47 (4), 1343–1366.

Stein, J.C., 2021. Can policy tame the credit cycle? IMF Econ. Rev. 69 (1), 5–22.
Stiglitz, J.E., 1982. The inefficiency of the stock market equilibrium. Rev. Econ. Stud.

Sufi, A., Taylor, A.M., 2022. Financial crises: A survey. Handb. Int. Econ. 6, 291–340.
Taylor, A.M., 2015. Credit, financial stability, and the macroeconomy. Annu. Rev. Econ.

1–53.

49 (2), 241–261.

7 (1), 309–339.

Werning, I., 2015. Incomplete markets and aggregate demand. NBER Working Paper.
Woodford, M., 2012. Inflation targeting and financial stability. Working Paper.
Yellen, J.L., 2009. A minsky meltdown: Lessons for central bankers. Presentation to
the  18th  annual  hyman  P.  In:  Minsky  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  US  and
World Economies ‘‘Meeting the Challenges of the Financial Crisis’’, Levy Economics
Institute of Bard College, Vol. 16. New York City, April.

19 

Gourio, F., Kashyap, A.K., Sim, J.W., 2018. The trade offs in leaning against the wind.

Simsek, A., 2013. Belief disagreements and collateral constraints. Econometrica 81 (1),

