Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Aspirational utility and investment behavior✩,✩✩
Andreas Aristidou a,1, Aleksandar Giga b, Suk Lee c, Fernando Zapatero d,∗
a Netflix, 121 Albright Way, 95032, Los Gatos, CA, USA
b Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management, TU Delft, Jaffalaan 5, 2628 BX, Delft, The Netherlands
c UNSW Business School, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
d Questrom School of Business, Boston University, 595 Commonwealth Ave, 02215, Boston, MA, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

JEL classification:
D9
G0
G4

Keywords:
Aspirational utility
Social status
Investment behavior
Laboratory experiment

1.  Introduction

We explore the extent to which aspirations – such as those forged in the course of social interactions –
explain ‘puzzling’ behavioral patterns in investment decisions. We motivate an aspirational utility, reminiscent
of Friedman and Savage (1948), where social considerations (e.g., status concerns) provide an economic
foundation for aspirations. We show this utility can explain a range of observed investor behaviors, such as the
demand for both right- and left-skewed assets; aspects of the disposition effect; and patterns in stock-market
participation consistent with empirical observations. We corroborate our theoretical findings with two novel
laboratory experimental studies, where we observed participants’ preference for skewness in risky lotteries
shift as lab-induced aspirations shifted.

It is well-known that standard utilities, such as CRRA utility, have
certain  limitations  in  their  ability  to  address  the  large  number  of
empirically observed patterns on investment behavior. In this regard,
a  growing  literature  focuses  on  the  fact  that  social  interactions  of-
ten influence our decision-making, and explores how such considera-
tions can aptly be modeled to explain financial (investment) decisions
(𝑒.𝑔 ., Hirshleifer (2015)). One key aspect of social interaction is that it
can often sow the seed of an aspiration, the setting of a forward-looking
goal that provides a burst of utility if realized. As a prominent example,
frequent  social  interactions  can  reinforce  an  aspiration  for  a  higher
social  status than  one’s  own,  either  because  of  a  status  competition
with  a  peer,  or  because  one  learns  –  during  the  course  of  social
interactions – that high status can reward that person with favorable
social outcomes (e.g., respect).2 The literature has looked at such social
aspects  in  the  context  of  asset  pricing  and  investment  behavior,  for

example, status concerns (Roussanov, 2010) or internal and external
habit  formation  (Sundaresan, 1989; Constantinides, 1990; Campbell
and Cochrane, 1999). Rayo and Becker (2007) argue that this type of
utility provides an evolutionary edge. While the vast majority of these
analyses underscore the importance of the relative position of wealth,
our  focus  is  also  on  the  fact  that  socializing  often  has aspirational
consequences. For example, the realization that the majority of one’s
peers are homeowners can fuel an aspiration for the status of home-
ownership. And because such an aspiration is typically attained through
the acquisition of a non-divisible, and prohibitively expensive good,
it  remains  an  aspiration  until  it  is  fulfilled,  and  generates  a  surge
of utility once it is obtained. We solidify this intuition and motivate
a  representation  of  aspirational  utility  by  paraphrasing  (Ng, 1965).
This motivational exercise illustrates why aspirational utility is likely
to  be  a  highly  realistic  feature  that  arises  commonly  in  economic
activities,  attributable  to  well-established  concepts  in  the  literature
such as status-seeking, external habits, peer pressure, and in general,

✩
Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We thank the editor and an anonymous referee for their insightful and constructive comments. We also
benefited from comments from Odilon Camara, Kevin Murphy, and Francesco Stradi, as well as seminar participants at USC Marshall School of Business, Toulouse
Business School, ITAM Mexico, University of Palma de Mallorca, ICADE (Madrid) and the Spanish Finance Forum. All remaining errors are ours.
✩✩

A previous version of this paper was circulated under the title: ‘‘Rolling the Skewed Die: Economic Foundations for the Demand for Skewness and Experimental

Evidence".

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: aristidouandreas13@gmail.com (A. Aristidou), a.giga@tudelft.nl (A. Giga), suk.lee@unsw.edu.au (S. Lee), fzapa@bu.edu (F. Zapatero).
1 Disclaimer: Dr. Aristidou contributed to this article as part of his doctoral dissertation at the University of Southern California. The views expressed are his

own and do not necessarily represent the views of Netflix.

2 Clearly,  status  is  not  the  sole  source  of  aspiration. Ng (1965)  shows  how  indivisible  consumption  in  general  – 𝑒.𝑔.  university  education  –  creates
aspirations. Genicot and Ray (2017) motivate aspiration as ‘‘the inspiration of higher goals and the potential frustrations that can result". Our experiment
stipulates that a charitable donation be made on behalf of the participant if their lottery gains exceeds a threshold: This threshold serves as an aspiration.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103970
Received 18 October 2022; Received in revised form 27 October 2024; Accepted 28 October 2024
Available online 16 November 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

whenever consumption goods are not perfectly divisible. In this paper,
we  aim  to  explore  the  extent  to  which  this  aspirational  utility  can
account for puzzles in individual investment behavior. Overall, we find
that it has the potential to explain many aspects of investment behavior,
to a degree comparable to leading theories such as Prospect Theory.

To start our analysis, we explore the capacity of aspirational util-
ity to explain the preference for skewness. Skewness-seeking plays an
important  part  in  people’s  investment  decisions  (Kumar, 2009),  and
investors  have  been  observed  to  sacrifice  some  diversification  and
high(er) returns for positive skewness (Mitton and Vorkink, 2007). In
fact, it has been argued that the demand for skewness has the potential
to explain some of the most challenging empirical puzzles contemplated
in the literature such as the value premium puzzle (Zhang, 2013). While
these are predominently discussed in the context of right-skewness, the
demand for left-skewness is also present in many economic decisions,
as we will later argue, exemplify and present experimental evidence
for. Nevertheless, the motives for such demand for skewness remain
unexplained to a large extent. We find that aspiration has a natural
potential to generate a preference for skewness in both directions. As
an example (for positive skewness), consider a salaried ‘‘middle class
worker’’ who yet aspires to the glamour of upper class lifestyle; the
Rolls-Royce, mansion, and a yacht. Devoid of any practical maneuver to
climb the status ladder, one ‘‘realistic’’ option to address this aspiration
is to buy a lottery ticket; 𝑖.𝑒. demand positive skewness. To formal-
ize  this  intuition,  we  build  upon  the  aspirational  utility  framework
by Diecidue and van de Ven (2008) using the concavification principle,
and show how a demand for skewness can arise endogenously. The
utility function is similar in shape to a CRRA function but incorporates
socially-driven elements such as status-seeking and external habits, by
specifying an aspiration (𝑅) that induces a positive jump in utility if the
spending exceeds 𝑅. We then introduce a parsimonious set of securities
(called ‘binomial martingales’) that contain different levels of skewness
allowing investors to choose the exact level of skewness – right or left
– optimal for their position in the utility function. From this setting, we
derive the demand for skewness as the optimal choice of security, the
result we succinctly express in the ‘‘four seasons of gambling ’’ diagram.
In particular, we show analytically that the relative position of the
aspiration 𝑅 (𝑖.𝑒., how far away the aspiration is), with respect to the
agent’s  current  wealth/consumption  level  (𝐶0)  is  a  critical  factor  in
determining the demand for skewness. If the agents’ aspiration is only
marginally  higher  than  the  current  endowment,  they  choose  to  sell
skewness.  In  other  words,  when  the  next  aspiration  point  is  within
the  reach  of  hand,  in  close  proximity  to  their  current  endowment,
the  agent  selects  a  security  that  lands  on  that  aspiration  level  with
relatively high probability. Such a security – high chance of a small
gain – is negatively skewed. On the other hand, by exactly symmetric
arguments, as the aspiration level moves further away from the current
position, the agent reaches for a long shot and chooses to buy right-
skewed securities, 𝑖.𝑒. lotteries. This is in sharp contrast to the standard
mean–variance analysis – with reasonable parameter values – where
agents avoid risk-taking when the expected return is zero or negative.
We also explore how endogenous demand for skewness changes with
respect to the parameters of the utility function. Predictably, the size
of the jump is a main factor. Perhaps surprisingly though, if attaining
the aspiration leads to a big jump in utility, agents choose less positively
skewed securities. Intuitively, this is because a big jump implies greater
importance of aspiration: the agent is then forced to demand securities
that can help get to the aspiration level with higher probability, albeit
at the expense of a lower level of consumption if the gamble fails. Such
securities contain low or even negative skewness. Analogous results are
presented for the level of risk aversion and initial wealth of the agent.
Leading theories on investment behavior – most notably Prospect
Theory  (Kahneman  and  Tversky, 1979)  –  attempt  to  provide  a  uni-
fied explanation for individual risk-taking behaviors such as skewness-
seeking and the disposition effect (Shefrin and Statman, 1985). In this
regard, we also explore the extent to which aspirations can produce

the disposition effect. In summary, we find that the aspirational setup
makes substantial progress towards generating the disposition effect,
although not to its full entirety. The part that we can address is the gen-
eral tendency of the (aspiration-driven) investor to ‘‘sell when winning,
and hold when losing’’, which we call the ‘temporal component’ of the
disposition effect. Intuitively, an aspiration can generate this temporal
component because it functions as a clear milestone in the investor’s
mindset, for example, the desire to purchase a ‘‘luxury handbag’’ once
the  investment  surpasses  the  price  of  the  bag.  Consequently,  such
an aspiration would promote a premature selling of the investment,
namely, as soon as the invested amount surpasses the price tag of the
‘‘luxury handbag’’, generating the behavior of ‘‘selling when winning’’.
(A similar, symmetric argument can be applied to explain why aspira-
tional investors tend to ‘‘hold on to losses’’.) However, the aspirational
setup also has a clear limitation in its capacity to explain the disposition
effect: While an aspiration can make an investor sell the portfolio when
winning (and hold on when losing), it is unable to make the investor
choose the particular winning (losing) stock to sell (retain), within the
cross-section of stocks in the portfolio. In this sense, it is unable to
explain (what we call) the ‘cross-sectional component’ of the disposition
effect. This limitation arises because our model is too ‘‘rational’’ (other
than the notion of aspiration) to fully explain the disposition effect.
In our model, agents optimize over the wealth’s position in relation
to their aspirations. Meanwhile, to generate the disposition effect up
to the cross-section, the aspiration must be placed on each individual
asset within the wealth portfolio, for example, an investment target for
every stock with separate mental accounts. Our model is less inviting
to the application of asset-specific target, as it is rather challenging to
put forward a ‘‘rational’’ reason for such asset-specific, psychological
attachment.

Such limitation notwithstanding, the aspirational setup also has a
clear  advantage  over  Prospect  Theory,  which  stands  as  the  leading
explanation  for  the  disposition  effect.  As Heimer (2016)  points  out,
the  capacity  of  Prospect  Theory  to  explain  the  disposition  effect  is
challenged by the fact that those who are predicted to be under the
disposition effect (by Prospect Theory) are, in fact, those who are least
likely to participate in (𝑖.𝑒., are the most pessimistic about) the stock
market in the first place. For this reason, Heimer (2016) argues that
a proposed explanation for the disposition effect must simultaneously
generate strong stock-market participation. Our aspiration utility meets
this requirement, as it offers a natural reason for agents to take risk
—  the  drive  to  attain  the  aspiration.  In  our  aspirational  setup,  this
compulsion is represented by a convex segment in utility, where the
agents are clearly risk-seeking. This increased appetite for risk raises the
portion of stocks in an investor’s portfolio, encouraging the aspiration-
driven  investor  to  simultaneously  display  the  disposition  effect and
participate in the stock market. The presence of convex segment is a
common feature shared by the utility proposed by Friedman and Savage
(1948), Levy (1969), as well as Prospect Theory. Our model adds to this
strand of literature by focusing on what we believe is a plausible, social
underpinning for such convexity.

In  addition  to  addressing  stock-market  participation  behavior  in
conjunction with the disposition effect, our theory also has the capac-
ity to explain some of the well-known puzzles in household finance
regarding  the  stock-market  participation  of  low  income  households.
Specifically,  it  has  been  considered  puzzling  that  the  stock  market
participation among the low income households is lower than optimal,
and those that do invest in stocks tend to be hardly diversified, which
is  clearly  sub-optimal  according  to  mainstream  theories.  While  the
conventional response to this has been to seek a behavioral alterna-
tive based on bias or ignorance, our aspirational narrative provides a
unique perspective based on the optimal choice of skewness. That is,
given that our theory predicts a demand for positive skewness for the
low income households, the seemingly sub-optimally low stock-market
participation  should  be  understood  as  an  optimal  substitution  away
from stocks to more positively skewed gambles, such as the lottery.

2 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

In similar vein, the reluctance to diversify is hardly puzzling in the
aspiration model, as it is understood as the pursuit of positive skewness
in individual stocks, in lieu of negative (or neutral) skewness in more
diversified portfolios. We gather pieces of evidence from the literature
that collectively support this narrative. Moreover, given that aspirations
are not exclusively for the low income investors, we conjecture that
there  are  multiple  aspirations  across  the  wealth  distribution,  where
some  may  be  representative  enough  to  be  priced  in  the  aggregate.
For example, many low income investors may aspire to ‘‘rise from the
economic challenges’’, whereas the wealthier may aim for ‘‘upper class
lifestyle’’. This allows us to explore stock-market investment behavior
across a wider spectrum of investors than just those in the lower end
of  the  wealth  distribution.  We  show  how  recent  empirical  findings
from Bali et al. (2023) support this notion of (two) generic aspirations,
where the wealthy actively take on risks in the stock market to address
their aspirations. This aspiration-based narrative is, in fact, consistent
with the idea that the wealthy seek idiosyncratic volatility to address
status concerns (e.g., Roussanov (2010)).

Showing how aspirations may affect investment choices in the real
world  is  challenging  as  it  is  very  rare  that  the  researcher  directly
observes the decision maker’s financial investments, their aspirations,
or how far they are from achieving them. Therefore, we proceed to
test our model’s key implications (on skewness) with an exploratory
lab  experiment.3 University  students  were  given  a  choice  of  simple
securities with varying degrees of skewness, holding mean and variance
constant. The subjects in the experiment were induced with an aspira-
tion point in the form of a (to them) non-monetary but heartwarming
award — by stipulating that a donation to a charity of their choice will
be made on their behalf, if the monetary gains from their experiment
result  exceeded  a  pre-specified  ‘‘Donation  threshold’’.4 Both  within-
and between-subject studies were conducted in which we controlled
how far the donation thresholds were from their current positions and
examined how that affected their choice of securities. The results are
in  line  with  our  predictions.  When  the  aspiration  point  is  close  by,
the  overall  demand  for  a  negatively  skewed  asset  increases.  When
reaching the aspirational jump is possible but distant, the demand for
positively skewed asset increases. Our results also showed that there
is substantial heterogeneity in the demand for skewness generated by
the aspiration, which may have been due to differences in the degree
to which donation generated aspirations, or simply due to ‘‘intrinsic’’
differences in their utility functions.

Our aspirational setup with a status-seeking motive is reminiscent
of  the  framework  first  established  by Friedman  and  Savage (1948),
which is motivated by the ‘puzzling’ observation that some investors
simultaneously buy insurance and lotteries. They interpret this puzzle
as  a  shortcoming  of  standard  utility  models,  and  respond  to  it  by
suggesting an ‘aspirational’ alternative. It is elucidating to note that
the puzzle they observe is valid only when looked through the lens of
‘‘volatility’’, and not through ‘‘skewness’’, an aspect that they overlook.
In  fact,  focusing  on  the  net  demand  for  right  (positive)  skewness
provides  a  rather  simple  resolution  of  the  puzzle:  Buying  a  lottery
ticket amounts to taking a long position in right skewness, and buying
insurance implies a short position in left skewness, both revealing a
preference for net right skewness. While this amply demonstrates the
merits of extending the scope of analysis to beyond what is habitually
explored, the second part of Friedman and Savage (1948)’s message –
namely, the shortcomings of standard utility models – remains just as

3 For some of the other predictions, we provide numerical simulations; for

example, a simulation based on Odean (1998) for the disposition effect.

4 In the literature, the idea that donation directly enters the utility function
is  refereed  to  as  ‘‘warm-glow  giving’’  (See,  for  example, Andreoni (1989))
and Andreoni (1990). Also, while the act of donation can be a source of utility
in its own right, charity donations have also been identified as a social status
symbol (Glazer and Konrad, 1996), which, as we argue in section 2, can be a
separate source of aspiration.

relevant because standard utility models fall far too short of explaining
many known patterns in investment behavior. As an example, consider
again  the  demand  for  skewness.  Although  CRRA  utility  in  principle
implies a preference for right skewness, the optimal policy of a CRRA
investor  with  reasonable  parameter  values  is  to sell short  a  lottery
because its negative expected return and high variance dominate the
effect of positive skewness.5 Efforts have been made to enrich the utility
function to account for the observed skewness preference. Kraus and
Litzenberger (1976) add weight to the positive third moment of wealth
in  the  standard  utility  function. Barberis  and  Huang (2008)  explain
the  demand  for  lottery-like  securities  through  probability  weighting
of  the  Cumulative  Prospect  Theory  (Tversky  and  Kahneman, 1992).
In Brunnermeier  et  al. (2007)’s  model,  over-optimism  generates  the
under-diversifed  and  lottery-seeking  portfolios.  Despite  these  efforts,
the demand for negative skewness is almost entirely rejected by these
theories – unless when presented with a sufficiently large and positive
expected payoff – and yet we show both conceptual and experimental
evidence  for  such  choices.  Similar  shortcomings  abound  regarding
other ‘puzzling investment behavior’ beyond the demand for skewness,
and these observations altogether justify our search for economic mo-
tives whose utility representation opens an avenue to address them. We
believe that aspiration, in the context of social interactions, is one such
motive worth exploring.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we motivate our
setup and derive our utility function. In Section 3 we study the optimal
demand for skewness for an agent with this utility. In Sections 4 and
5 we  discuss  how  our  aspirational  model  compares  against  leading
theories on investment behavior regarding some behavioral ‘‘puzzles’’
such  as  the  disposition  effect  and  known  patterns  in  stock-market
participation. Section 6 discusses how our aspirational model comple-
ments existing theories on how social interactions affect investments.
In Section 7 we present our laboratory study and results. We close the
paper with some conclusions.

2.  An aspirational utility: A motivation and representation

In  this  section,  we  motivate  and  discuss  ‘aspirational  utility’:  a
standard utility function augmented by elements of ‘‘goal and its at-
tainment’’.  We  are  not  the  first  to  discuss  aspiration  in  the  context
of risk-taking choices. Lopes (1987) establishes a theory (‘‘SP/A the-
ory’’) where the ‘‘hope’’ (or ‘‘fear’’) of attaining (or missing) and as-
piration (‘‘A’’, for Aspiration) determines the choice of the decision-
maker. Shefrin and Statman (2000) develops this idea into a theory of
portfolio choice (‘‘Behavioral Portfolio Theory’’). Operationally, these
theories  embed  the  notion  of  aspiration  into  the  model  by  over-  or
under-weighting probabilities in line with the psychological response of
the agent vis-a-vis the aspiration. (This is reminiscent of the ‘‘Weighting
Function"  in  Cumulative  Prospect  Theory.)  Our  approach  shares  the
focus on aspiration of these works, but is more akin to – and builds
upon – the work of Diecidue and van de Ven (2008) who microfound
a discontinuity in utility function as a representation of aspiration.

2.1.  A motivation: Local, bulky status goods

To  illustrate  how  aspirational  utility  may  arise  from  natural  mi-
croeconomic foundations, we consider Roussanov (2010) who analyzes
status-seeking in the context of investment choices. Under his setup,
agents care not only about standard consumption (𝐶) but also about
status; their wealth relative to the (global) average in the economy. We

5 To see how CRRA implies some preference for skewness, consider the
third-order term in the Taylor expansion of a standard CRRA utility function,
which yields a small but positive coefficient. Meanwhile, the selling of lottery
– as is predicted by CRRA – is clearly in stark contrast to the observed large
and positive aggregate demand for lottery tickets.

3 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 1. Utilities from 𝐶 , 𝑆 and optimized utility over wealth, 𝑈 ∗(𝑊 ). The status good for the upper class (𝑆𝑈 ) is omitted here (because, being disproportionately expensive, it
cannot be aptly drawn to scale), but the shape of the aspirational ‘jump’ around 𝑆𝑈 closely resembles the first two.

Table 1
The share of population (Column 2) by ‘‘class identifications’’ comes directly from a survey done in the United States (Pew
Research Center, 2024). The (net) household wealth intervals (Column 3) were found by matching Column 2 with data from
the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances (2023), after (piecewise linear) interpolation. Column 4 is a notional value
of the signature status good in each class, which we simply assume to be the arithmetic mean of each wealth interval.

Lower class
Middle class
Upper class

Share of
Population

28%

52%

19%

Household Wealth
(Net, US Dollars)
−$36, 000 ∼ $61, 000
$61, 000 ∼ $1, 002, 000
$1, 002, 000 ∼ $4, 856, 000

‘‘S-good Value’’
(US Dollars)
𝑆𝐿 = $12, 000
𝑆𝑀 = $532, 000
𝑆𝑈 = $2, 929, 000

‘‘Signature’’
S-Good
‘‘Jewels and Apparels’’
‘‘Suburban House’’
‘‘Boat in Marina’’

make two observations that further enhance the realism of this setup:
(𝑖) Realistically, status is conferred by status goods (denoted ‘𝑆’) that
are typically expensive and indivisible. (𝑖𝑖) The competition for status is
likely to be local, rather than global; the task is to ‘‘keep up with the
Joneses’’, not the Rockefellers.6

Table  1 describes  a  survey  of  social  class  in  the  United  States,
along  with  the  wealth  levels  they  represent.  In  line  with  the  two
observations above, suppose the status competition is local; there are
class-specific status benchmarks (e.g., the average wealth level of each
class), that can only be beaten by acquiring the respective status goods
(𝑆𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟, 𝑆𝑀 𝑖𝑑 𝑑 𝑙 𝑒, 𝑆𝑈 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟).7 For example, the lower class could compete
with ‘‘jewels and apparels’’ (𝑆𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 = $12 k ≈ −$36k+$61k
); the symbol
of a robust-incomed middle class may be ‘‘home-ownership’’ (𝑆𝑀 𝑖𝑑 𝑑 𝑙 𝑒 =
$532 k ≈ $61k+$1,002k
); an exclusive upper class society may require a
‘‘yacht’’ (𝑆𝑈 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 = $2, 929 k ≈ $1,002k+$4,856k
) to be acknowledged as a
competent peer. Because these status goods are effectively local signals
of wealth, they are unavoidably bulky and indivisible. Using log-utility
and assuming (for simplicity) that utility from status (𝑆) is on par with
𝑙 𝑜𝑔(𝐶), the described setup can be represented as:
,  𝐶 + 𝑆 ≤ 𝑊 .
𝑈 (𝐶 , 𝑆) = 𝑙 𝑜𝑔(𝐶) + [𝑙 𝑜𝑔(𝑆)]𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑀 ,𝑆𝑈
The second term is the utility from status, depicted as a ‘log-inscribing
step function’ in Fig. 1 (steps occurring at 𝑆𝐿, 𝑆𝑀 , 𝑆𝑈 ) to represent the
innate indivisibility of 𝑆.

(1)

2

2

2

6 The  notion  that  status  can  be  ‘‘bought’’  (conferred  by  status  goods)
is  common  in  the  status  literature;  see  for  example, Becker  et  al. (2005)
or Heffetz and Frank (2011). Also, the local nature of status goods is akin to the
analyses of Charles et al. (2009) who explore the economic consequences of
viewing race as a localized status group. Lastly, the notion of indivisibility and
its impact on economic choice have been explored in various other contexts
as well, for example, on timing options (Henderson and Hobson, 2013) and
monetary policy (McKay and Wieland, 2021).

7 This is clearly a simplification. However, the aspirational shape of utility
– which is the goal of this motivational exercise – is invariant to the specific
assumptions we make on how the status good is priced within each wealth
class.

Solving the optimization problem on (1) yields 𝑈 ∗(𝑊 ) in Fig. 1. The
utility is notably ‘aspirational’, surging when 𝑊 modestly exceeds the
status benchmark. This represents the status jump that occurs when the
individual has enough wealth to acquire the status symbol, on top of
the ‘bread and butter’ (𝐶) needed to sustain herself. Finally, 𝑈 ∗(𝑊 ) is
very similar to Ng (1965), who motivates a nearly identical aspirational
utility based on the notion of indivisibility alone. This similarity implies
that aspirational utility is likely to be common, occurring whenever
there is some element of indivisibility. One prominent source of such
bulkiness, as we argue, is status-seeking.

2.2.  A functional representation of aspirational utility

For  the  sake  of  our  focus  –  the  interaction  between  aspiration
and  risk-taking  behavior  –  we  simplify 𝑈 ∗(𝑊 ) using  a  well-known
concavification principle: Any two utility functions that share the same
convex hull yields the same optimizing solution using martingale gam-
bles  (investments).  Operationally,  this  simply  means  that  the  utility
functions in Panels 𝐈 and 𝐈𝐈 in Fig. 2 are ‘‘the same’’ as long as we
use martingale gambles for analysis (which we generally do). Going
forward, we use the representation in Panel 𝐈𝐈, which is easier to handle
analytically, and has a clearer aspiration point (‘𝑅’ in Panel 𝐈𝐈), a useful
feature for the experiment section that follows.

The following is a formal representation of the utility in Panel II.
Going forward, we dispense with the motivational distinction between
𝐶 and 𝑆, and abbreviate all wealth denominations into 𝐶. Consider
an expected utility (EU) maximizing agent with initial endowment 𝐶0.
The utility of consuming 𝐶 is conventional (𝑢′ > 0, 𝑢′′ < 0), except
that the agent has an aspiration to reach 𝑅, (𝑅 > 𝐶0) so that the agent
effectively discounts payoffs that fall below 𝑅;
if 𝐶 < 𝑅 ( where 0 < 𝛿 < 1)
if 𝐶 ≥ 𝑅.
𝑢(𝐶),

{𝛿 𝑢(𝐶),

𝑈 (𝐶) =

(2)

Here, 𝛿 is a multiplicative constant (0 < 𝛿 < 1) that applies a discount
to utility that fall below the location of aspiration, 𝑅. Hence, a value of
𝛿 close to 1 (0) indicates that the aspiration is mild (strong).

4 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 2. An illustration of concavification. Panel I is (essentially part of) the original 𝑈 ∗(𝑊 ) in Fig. 1. Via concavification, the utilities in Panels I and II yield the same optimization
solutions using martingales, because they share the same convex hull, i.e., the same ‘bridge’ (BD) above C and C’.

3.  The optimal demand for skewness

For many, skewness-seeking is an important element in their invest-
ment decisions (𝑒.𝑔. Kumar (2009)). And there is substantial evidence
that  skewness  is  demanded  and  priced  in  the  market  for  financial
securities,  in  equities  (Kraus  and  Litzenberger (1976), Harvey  and
Siddique (2000), Boyer et al. (2010), Bali et al. (2011), Conrad et al.
(2013)),  options  (Boyer  and  Vorkink, 2014),  and  IPOs  (Green  and
Hwang, 2012). In this Section, we explore how the optimal choice of
skewness arises endogenously given the aspirational utility we derived
in Section 2. To this end, we first define the set of ‘‘skewed die’’ that the
aspirational agent can roll (‘binomial martingales’). We then observe
the optimal choice (‘‘the four seasons of gambling’’), and subsequently,
how these optimal choices may vary with respect to the underlying
parameters (comparative statics).

3.1.  The aspirational agent’s choice set: The ‘‘skewed die’’

Since  the  goal  in  this  Section  is  to  understand  how  preference
for  skewness  can  endogenously  arise  from  aspirations,  we  introduce
an expected utility (𝐸 𝑈 ) maximization setting that allows agents to
make  their  optimal  choice  of  skewness.  To  this  end,  we  introduce
the following set of securities that defines the choice set of the 𝐸 𝑈 -
maximizing  agents.  The  idea  is  to  first  focus  parsimoniously  on  the
level of skewness embedded in these set of securities, and add in other
features if needed.

Let 𝐿(𝑝) be a binomial martingale (i.e., fair game with two outcomes)
with 𝑝 ∈ (0, 1). That is, 𝐿(𝑝) is a fair gamble which costs 𝜋 to purchase,
and pays 𝑀 with probability 𝑝.

.

To ensure that 𝐿(𝑝) is a martingale, we require: 0  = 𝑝(𝑀 − 𝜋) +
(1 − 𝑝)(−𝜋). This pins down 𝑀 as a function of price of lottery 𝜋 and 𝑝:
𝑀(𝜋 , 𝑝) = 𝜋
𝑝

Similarly, let 𝐿∗(𝑝) be an extended binomial martingale with 𝑝 ∈
(−∞, 1). That is, it is a gamble which pays 𝐶𝑆 with ‘‘probability’’ 𝑝 and
𝐶𝐹 with ‘‘probability’’ 1 − 𝑝, such that:
0 = 𝑝(𝑀 − 𝜋) + (1 − 𝑝)(−𝜋),  𝑝 ∈ (−∞, 1)

(3)

Note that the only difference is the domain of 𝑝. That we allow 𝑝 < 0
means that at this stage, 𝑝 and 1 − 𝑝 should be interpreted as ‘weights’,

5 

rather than probabilities. The reason for extending the domain is to
keep  the  structure  consistent  and  tidy  throughout  the  analysis;  for
those  who  prefer  to  focus  on  ‘real-world  intuition’,  it  would  not  do
much  harm  to  ignore  the  term  ‘extended’  for  now.  The  real-world
interpretation of 𝑝 < 0 will be provided in Theorem 2.

Using the set of securities 𝐿∗(𝑝), the agent can construct a 𝑐 𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝
𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑠𝑐 ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒 by exercising freedom over two dimensions: (𝑖) which se-
curity (𝐿∗(𝑝), choice is over 𝑝) to purchase and (𝑖𝑖) how much of that
security she wishes to purchase. Let 𝑁 be the number of security she
purchases. Let 𝐶𝑆 be the consumption she enjoys if each unit of her
security pays 𝑀 − 𝜋. Let 𝐶𝐹 be the consumption she gets if each unit of
her security pays −𝜋. Without loss of generality,8 we fix the unit cost
of investment (𝜋) at 1, going forward.

Note  here  that  because 𝐿∗(𝑝) is  a  martingale,  the  structure  of
his consumption scheme is also a martingale (can easily be verified
algebraically by eliminating 𝑁 in Eqs. (6), (7) and adding in (8) below),
namely:
𝐶0 = 𝑝𝐶𝑆 + (1 − 𝑝)𝐶𝐹 .

(4)
To  summarize,  we  have  created  a  set  of  securities  that  abstracts
away from variations in the first moment (expected returns) by im-
posing the martingale assumption. We also simplify the distributional
structure of these fair games by assuming a binomial payoff. All this is
to ensure a particular focus on the third moment: skewness, a partic-
ularity we relax in the internet appendix. Using binomial martingales,
the agent can set up her consumption scheme by choosing (𝑝, 𝑁). Under
this setup, we now move on to the utility maximization problem of the
agent.

3.2.  Utility maximization: ‘‘Rolling the Skewed Die’’

Consider an agent with aspirational utility represented by (2), with
aspiration  point 𝑅 and  current  wealth 𝐶0 (𝐶0 <  𝑅).  The 𝐸 𝑈 −
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑚, with the 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑 𝑒𝑑 𝐿∗(𝑝) is:

8 Under the martingale restriction, 𝑀(𝜋 , 𝑝) = 𝜋
𝑝

− 1).
This means that any change in 𝜋 simply amounts to adjusting the scale of bet,
𝑁. Since 𝑁 is already a choice variable, we can fix ‘𝜋 = 1’ without loss of
generality.

, hence 𝑀 − 𝜋 = 𝜋( 1
𝑝

A. Aristidou et al.

(1 − 𝑝)𝑈 (𝐶𝐹 ) + 𝑝𝑈 (𝐶𝑆 )

max
𝑝∈(−∞,1)
𝑁∈[0,∞)

subject to:

𝐶𝐹 = 𝐶0 − 𝑁 ,

𝐶𝑆 = 𝐶0 + 𝑁(𝑀 − 1),

0 = 𝑝(𝑀 − 1) + (1 − 𝑝)(−1).

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

This problem requires optimization over two dimensions, 𝑁 and 𝑝. The
following Lemma allows us to reduce a dimension.

Lemma 1. Consider the EU-maximization problem above for (2). Assume
the following holds:
𝑈 ′( ̃𝐶𝐹 ) = 𝑈 ′

> 𝑈 ′(𝑅+).

(9)

)

( 𝐶0 − 𝑝𝑅
1 − 𝑝

Then any solution to the EU-maximization problem, (𝑝∗, 𝑁 ∗), satisfies 𝐶 ∗
𝑅.

𝑆 =

Assumption (9) of Lemma  1 is  not  automatically  satisfied  unless
𝛿 =  1 (in  which  case  it  is  automatic  since  it  can  be  easily  verified
̃𝐶𝐹 <  𝑅 and CRRA marginal utility decreases in 𝐶), yet is still
that
̃𝐶𝐹 is higher
innocuous. It only requires that the marginal utility at
than the marginal utility at 𝑅. This is intuitive: Once the agent attains
the aspiration, the hankering dissipates and marginal utility goes down,
almost by definition.

This  Lemma  is  useful  because  for  any  proposedly  optimal 𝑝,  the
corresponding 𝑁 is  automatically  adjusted  so  that 𝐶𝑆 = 𝑅 holds.
Hence, using Lemma 1, we can reduce the EU-maximization problem
(Eqs. (5)∼(8)) to the following ‘reduced form’ setup:

max
𝑝∈(−∞,1)

(1 − 𝑝)𝑈 (𝐶𝐹 ) + 𝑝𝑈 (𝑅)

subject to 𝐶0 = 𝑝𝑅 + (1 − 𝑝)𝐶𝐹 .

(10)

The  constraint  here  inherits  from (4) with 𝐶𝑆 fixed  at 𝑅,  as  per
Lemma 1. From now on, we adhere to this reduced form setup, which
means we will only look at the parameter space (𝛿 , 𝑅, 𝐶0) ⊂ R3 where
Assumption (9) applies.

Before laying down a set of results that characterize the behavior
of  solutions  to  the  problem,  we  introduce  an  ancillary  Lemma  that
relates 𝑝 with the level of skewness embodied in 𝐿(𝑝). The definition of
skewness we use is ‘Pearson’s moment coefficient of skewness’: 𝑆(𝑝) =
E

[( 𝑋−𝜇

)3]

.

𝜎

Let 𝑆 ∶ 𝑝(0, 1) ↦ R denote ‘Pearson’s moment coefficient of

Lemma 2.
skewness’ of the consumption scheme induced by L(p). Then:
(i) S(p) is monotonically decreasing in p
(ii) 𝑆(𝑝) ↑ ∞ as 𝑝 ↓ 0 (iii) 𝑆( 1
2
(iv) 𝑆(𝑝) ↓ −∞ as 𝑝 ↑ 1

) = 0

This  Lemma  describes  the  relationship  between 𝑝 and  skewness
implied by 𝑝. In particular, it shows that skewness is monotone in 𝑝 and
hence, the 𝑝∗ chosen as the solution to the EU-maximization problem
(10) uniquely determines the level of skewness that the agent’s choice
implies. If 𝑝∗ = 1
, the agent is demanding a symmetric security. If
2
𝑝∗ < 1
, the agent is demanding a positively-skewed security; a security
2
that  has  ‘lottery-like’  features.  If 𝑝∗ > 1
,  the  agent  is  demanding
2
a  negatively-skewed  security;  e.g.,  a  security  that  delivers  modestly
positive returns most of the time, but very negative returns in rare,
but unfortunate states. Note that when 𝑝∗ > 1
, the returns during the
2
bad state have to be ‘very negative’ in order to honor the martingale
assumption, since it has to compensate for the high (> 1
) likelihood of
2
reaching a good state. This is increasingly so as 𝑝∗ approaches 1.

6 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

3.3.  The optimal choice of skewness: ‘‘The Four Seasons of Gambling’’

We now return to the EU-maximization problem. We specialize 𝑢(⋅)
to be the power (CRRA) utility with coefficient of relative risk aversion
𝛾 (𝛾 > 1). For technical comfort (and realism), we assume 1 ≤ 𝐶0( < 𝑅).
Namely,  first,  it  is  natural  to  assume  that 𝐶0 is  lower  than 𝑅.  We
also require 1 ≤ 𝐶0 to ensure that utility is always positive at 𝐶0, so
that multiplying by 𝛿 at 𝑅 (> 𝐶0) is indeed a discount. This does not
harm generality, since we can always translate the utility function to be
positive. Also, to make the problem non-trivial, we assume 0 < 𝛿 < 1.
Theorems 1 and 2 characterize the solution to the EU-maximization
problem, 𝑝∗.

Theorem 1 below describes how 𝑝∗ – the optimal security demanded
by the agent with aspirational utility – changes with the position of his
aspiration (𝑅) relative to current wealth level (𝐶0).

Theorem  1.
Let  u(C)  be  the  power  utility  function  and  let 𝐿∗(𝑝) be
an  extended  binomial  martingale  with  p: }}probabilityε of  success  (𝑝 ∈
(−∞, 1)). Fix 𝐶0: initial wealth, and consider the reduced EU-maximization
problem (10) with R: aspiration (𝐶0 < 𝑅). Let 𝑝∗ be the }}probabilityε that
maximizes the expected utility. Then:
(i)

> 0

𝜕 𝑝∗
𝐶0
𝜕(
𝑅 )
𝐶0
(ii) as (
) ↑ 1 (i.e., as 𝐶0 ↑ 𝑅), 𝑝∗ ↑ 1
𝑅
(iii) ∃( 𝐶0
)∗ ∈ (0, 1) such that 𝑝∗ ≤ 0.
𝑅

Theorem 1-(𝑖) asserts that as 𝑅 moves further out, away from 𝐶0, the
agent demands more positively skewed security. In everyday parlance,
this  means  that  as  her  aspiration  becomes  ‘unrealistically  high’,  the
agent starts to demand more and more ‘lottery-like’ securities to meet
the aspiration. When 𝐶0 is far away from 𝑅, attempting such a big jump
in consumption (𝑅 − 𝐶0) with high chance comes at the cost of disas-
trously low consumption if the attempt fails. (Recall that all securities
in the choice set are fair gambles.) Thus, the agent rationally avoids
the abysmally low utility levels in bad states, through the purchase of
positively skewed security (with low 𝑝∗.) Moreover, the positive sign on
the derivative asserts that this relationship is monotonic. That is, as
agents’ aspirations move far from (close to) 𝐶0, the optimal choice of
skewness will increase (decrease) monotonically.

Theorem 1-(𝑖𝑖) describes the opposite situation. As 𝑅 moves closer
to 𝐶0, the agent prefers increasingly negatively-skewed security: that
which takes her to the aspiration (𝑅) with high chance at the expense
of a low-chance event of a disaster. While it is true that the martingale
assumption  requires  that 𝐶𝐹 be  low  (because 𝑝∗ is  close  to  1),  the
proximity of 𝐶0 to 𝑅 ensures that the associated 𝐶𝐹 is not unacceptably
low.  In  other  words,  the  proximity  of  the  aspiration  ensures  that
the agent can avoid exposing herself to the risk of ‘‘ruin’’ (destitute
poverty), even while taking negatively skewed bets.

Theorem 1-(𝑖𝑖𝑖) describes what happens when the aspiration is too
far,  or  equivalently,  when  the  agent  is  ‘‘too  poor’’. Theorem  1-(𝑖𝑖𝑖)
asserts that at some point, the aspiration will be so remote that it is
optimal to choose 𝑝∗ ≤ 0. At this point, however, we are interpreting
𝑝∗ as ‘‘optimal weights’’, because 𝑝∗ has no real world analogue. The
full meaning of Theorem 1-(𝑖𝑖𝑖) will be revealed in Theorem 2.

Taken together, Theorem 1-(𝑖), -(𝑖𝑖), and -(𝑖𝑖𝑖) show that as 𝑅 gets
pushed  away  from 𝐶0,  the  agent’s  demand  runs  through  the  entire
gamut of securities, starting from the most negatively skewed to the
most positively skewed. This happens for any fixed 𝛿 ∈  (0, 1), which
determines the ‘size of jump.’

Theorem 2. Assume (as is in the real world) that only L(p) with 𝑝 ∈ (0, 1)
is  available.  When 𝑝∗ ≤ 0,  the  agent  chooses 𝐶0 over  any  L(p)  with
𝑝 ∈ (0, 1).

Theorems 1 and 2 together tell us what happens as 𝑅 increases rela-
tive to 𝐶0. At first, as 𝐶0 stands close to 𝑅, the agents demand negatively
skewed securities for the reasons explained above. As 𝑅 increases, the

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 3. ‘‘The Four Seasons of Gambling’’ (Thm 1 and 2). Fix any point of 𝛿. As 𝑅
increases (moving downward, 𝑖.𝑒. as the aspiration moves farther away), the ‘‘four seasons’’
𝐶0
always appear in the order of ‘‘Spring’’ (light blue, negative skewness); ‘‘Summer’’ (yellow, symmetric); ‘‘Autumn’’ (brown, positive skewness); ‘‘Winter’’ (navy, no gamble). This
was diagram was drawn with a CRRA utility function with coefficient of relative risk aversion of 2 (𝛾 = 2) and initial wealth of 1 (𝐶0 = 1). (For interpretation of the references
to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

agents start demanding more symmetric securities (e.g., stocks), then
positively skewed ‘lottery-like’ securities. As we move the 𝑅 away from
𝐶0 further, agents eventually reach a certain threshold where they stay
with 𝐶0, thereby stop demanding risky securities altogether. We may
call this the ‘‘four seasons of gambling’’ as depicted in Fig. 3.

∈ [1, 3]. Fix any 𝛿, and start from 𝑅
𝐶0

The horizontal axis represents the 𝛿 ∈ [0, 1], and the vertical axis
represents 𝑅
= 1. Theorems 1
𝐶0
and 2 says that when 𝑅
≈  1, agents start fresh by buying negative
𝐶0
skewness  (Spring,  light  blue).  Then,  as 𝑅
increases,  they  start  to
𝐶0
buy  symmetric  securities  (Summer,  yellow),  then  positively  skewed
securities (Autumn, brown), and ultimately, they stop (Winter, navy).
Although the picture is truncated at 𝑅
= 3, if we were to elongate the
𝐶0
picture, we would indeed see that winter hits agents for any given 𝛿.

3.4.  Negative skewness: Some real-world examples

As mentioned, a distinguishing feature our framework is that it also
predicts the demand for negative skewness, as well as positive skewness.
Negative skewness-seeking is a situation where decision-makers seek
bets that provide modest gains most of the time but disastrous losses
on  rare  occasions,  a  proverbial  ‘‘picking  up  pennies  in  front  of  a
steamroller’’. While seemingly less encountered than positive skewness
– which has a salient presence in the real world in the form of lotteries
– we provide examples to illustrate the fact that negative skewness is
present in many facets of our economic life, and quite possibly, even
beyond.

In the financial derivative markets, the practice of selling (writing)
an ‘‘out-of-the-money’’ option allows an investor to pocket the modest
premium  in  the  likely  event  that  the  option  expires  unexercised,  at
the expense of incurring a ‘tail event’ of an unlimited downside when
the option is exercised. This strategy is popularized using books and
media exposure for general public explaining easy-to-follow steps to
implement the strategy.9 In another example, popular exchange traded
products (ETPs) allow retail investors to short (bet inversely on) the
movement  of  the  volatility  index  (VIX).  Since  the  VIX  moderately

9 For  example, The  Complete  Guide  to  Option  Selling:  How  Selling  Options
Can Lead to Stellar Returns in Bull and Bear Markets, by Cordier and Gross
(2014). Cordier gained a reputation as a successful investor selling options,
by collecting option premium that ‘‘expires worthless’’ during normal times.
This strategy proved reasonably lucrative until the fund was unable to respond
to margin calls during a high volatility event, and subsequently liquidated,
leading to Cordier’s public apology.

declines during ‘‘normal’’ times and spikes during ‘‘abnormal times’’ of
high volatility, shorting it allows investor to often profit, but also to
lose significantly when the VIX spikes.10 In the context of institutional
investing,  such  preference  for  negative  skewness  may  be  reinforced
by a payment structure where the fund manager is rewarded by fees
dependent  on  frequent  gains  while  protected  with  limited  personal
liability in the case of extreme losses.

Negatively  skewed  bets  are  found  beyond  the  world  of  finance:
consider  for  example  the  various  cases  of  fraud.  While  a  moderate-
scale tax delinquency provides some extra income, it entails a small
but positive chance of detection by the tax authorities leading to serious
consequences. Yet, tax evasion is a widespread phenomenon (Slemrod,
2019) and likely across the entire wealth distribution (Artavanis et al.,
2016). Some types of fraud are associated with aspirations or goals.
Managers  may  be  prone  to  commit  white-collar  crime  (𝑒.𝑔.  finan-
cial misconduct) under pressure to achieve company performance tar-
gets (Soltes, 2016). Chen et al. (2024) present a theory which argues
that  white-collar  crime  can  be  viewed  as  negatively-skewed  bets  to
attain (or maintain) a managerial aspiration (milestone). Also not so
uncommon (Ntoumanis et al., 2014) and scandalous when uncovered,
cheating in sports (𝑒.𝑔. doping) is likely to go undetected and leave
the perpetrator with gains — such as a win, a record or a medal that
endows the player with superiority status.11 This goal-oriented attitude
has been linked to cheating in sports (Ring and Kavussanu, 2018).

3.5.  Comparative statics

We are now ready to harvest a few comparative statics results that
illustrate the choice of skewness by aspirational agents. We continue
specializing 𝑢(𝐶) to be CRRA utility with risk aversion 𝛾.

10 Indeed, this is precisely what happened during a ‘‘Volmageddon’’ event
in 2018 when the VIX soared 115% overnight and a number of such short-VIX
funds were closed down after record losses. (‘‘Four years after ‘Volmageddon’,
new volatility ETFs to hit market", Reuters)
11 The following Wall Street Journal article covers an example of such in
the professional game of chess; on how it is likely to be common, difficult to
detect, and how an ambitious player may have succumbed to the temptation
to cheat his way to beat the incumbent champion.(‘‘Chess Probe Finds U.S.
Grandmaster  Cheated–Just  Not  Against  Magnus  Carlsen’’, The  Wall  Street
Journal)

7 

A. Aristidou et al.

3.5.1.  Size of jump

Theorem 3.

𝑑 𝑝∗
𝑑 𝛿

< 0

Theorem  3 explains  what  happens  as 𝛿 increases.  Recall  that 𝛿
is  how  much  the  agent 𝑘𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑠 when  the  consumption  falls  short  of
the  reference  point 𝑅,  hence  (1 − 𝛿)  determines  the  ‘size  of  jump’.
As 𝛿 increases,  agents  take  the  aspirations less seriously,  and  can
hence afford to attain it with lower probability (like lottery). In other
words, when 𝛿 is high, it is less imperative to attain 𝑅, and agents
demand securities with higher skewness which limits the downward
risk  (i.e.,  low 𝐶𝐹 )  at  the  expense  of  lower  chance  of  attaining 𝑅.
However,  as 𝛿 decreases,  agents  must  take  the  kink  more  seriously,
forcing them to give up more of their 𝐶𝐹 in bad state to ensure that they
reach 𝑅 with higher probability. The agents thus demand increasingly
negative-skewed securities. Fig. 3 also illustrates this.

3.5.2.  Initial endowment

Theorem 4. Fix 𝛿 , 𝛾 , and 𝜉 = 𝐶0
𝑅

. Then, 𝜕 𝑝∗

𝜕 𝐶0 |𝛿 ,𝛾 ,𝜉 > 0

Theorem 4 is also very intuitive. As agents become wealthier, they
need to worry less and less about the disastrous states where marginal
utility  is  extremely  high.  Hence,  they  can  afford  to  take  more  and
more downside risk, thereby demanding less skewed securities. This
coincides with the empirical findings (e.g., Kumar (2009)) that report
more  active  engagement  in  lottery-like  bets  among  consumers  with
lower income.

Note that Theorem 4 is saying a little more than Theorem 1-(ii),

|𝛿 ,𝛾 ,𝑅 > 0.

which is effectively saying that
𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝐶0
The  difference  here  in Theorem  4 is  that  we  are  fixing 𝜉 = 𝐶0
𝑅
instead of 𝑅. Thus, here we are not decreasing the distance between
𝐶0 and 𝑅 as we increase 𝐶0. The point here is that 𝑝∗ increases even
when 𝑅 increases along with 𝐶0, and that the increase of 𝑝∗ is purely
an  endowment  effect,  rather  than  effect  of 𝐶0 approaching 𝑅 as  in
Theorem 1-(𝑖𝑖).

3.5.3.  Risk aversion

𝑅
𝐶0

Theorem 5. Fix 𝐶0 and 𝛿. Suppose R is ‘big enough’ to satisfy:
(

( 1
𝑅

) log 𝑅
𝐶0
) − 1

( 𝑅
𝐶0
( 𝑅
𝐶0
) is a positive term which vanishes at the rate of 1
𝑅

)−𝛾 ⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

< 𝛿 ,

+ 

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

)

. Then,

where ( 1
𝑅
𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝛾 |𝛿 ,𝐶0,𝑅 < 0.

We first give some numerical examples to get a feel for how strin-
gent the assumption is. For reasonable parameters values such as 𝛿 =
0.8, 𝛾 = 2, 𝐶0 = 2, 𝜕 𝑝∗
< 0 will hold whenever 𝑅 > 3.491. For 𝛿 = 0.8,
𝜕 𝛾
𝛾 = 2, 𝐶0 = 1.5, 𝜕 𝑝∗
< 0 will hold whenever 𝑅 > 2.227. For 𝛿 = 0.8,
𝜕 𝛾
𝛾 = 2, 𝐶0 = 1, 𝜕 𝑝∗
< 0 will hold whenever 𝑅 > 1.159. The role of this
𝜕 𝛾
𝑅-threshold (higher than which will allow full monotonicity) can be
interpreted as follows. Suppose the agent has 𝐶0 in his hands. Higher
𝛾 implies that his utility function is more concave. In the power utility
setting, this extra concavity is achieved by pulling down the utility of
the agent both on positive outcomes (𝐶  > 1) and negative outcomes
(𝐶  < 1)  with 𝐶 =  1 as  the  anchoring  case.  (See Fig.  4 below.)  In
our setting, the agent with higher 𝛾 discounts both 𝑢(𝐶𝑆 ) and 𝑢(𝐶𝐹 )
more  heavily  than  in  the  log-utility  case.  This  has  consequences  on
𝑝∗. The depressed 𝑢(𝐶𝑆 ) affects 𝑝∗ unequivocally; it acts to lower 𝑝∗.
Intuitively, this is because the reduced upside discourages the agent
from taking much downside risk (in the form of lower 𝐶𝐹 ) in return,
and the agent consequently decreases 𝑝∗ to ensure that 𝐶𝐹 does not

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

fall too low. (Recall that we are envisioning a martingale situation.)
Hence, the agent with higher 𝛾 chooses lower 𝑝∗. Meanwhile, the effect
of the depressed 𝑢(𝐶𝐹 ) on 𝑝∗ can go both ways. When 𝛾 is higher and
the downside is even lower, the agent faces a predicament: on the one
hand, she wishes to avert the painful depth of the downside by choosing
to increase 𝐶𝐹 . However, this can only be done at the cost of lowered
𝑝∗, again, because of the martingale assumption. The lowered 𝑝∗ means
that  she  is  undermining  her  very  chance  of  avoiding  the  downside,
albeit perhaps a less painful one. Since the agent faces this inevitable
trade-off, the effect of depressed 𝑢(𝐶𝐹 ) is ambivalent. Nevertheless, we
still can say this with absolute certainty: as 𝐶𝑆 = 𝑅 grows, so does the
magnitude by which 𝑢(𝐶𝑆 ) gets depressed. (See Fig. 4.) This means that
the unequivocal effect of the depressed upside (i.e., lower 𝑝∗) will grow
bigger and bigger, until at some point it dominates the (ambivalent and
hence limited) effect of the depressed downside. This is precisely our
assumption in Theorem 5: as 𝑅 exceeds a certain threshold, the effect of
𝛾 on 𝑝∗ becomes monotonic. Modulo the assumption, the broad-strokes
conclusion of Theorem 5 is intuitive: agents with higher risk-aversion
will choose lower 𝑝∗ securities to minimize their perceived downside.

4.  Aspiration and the disposition effect

As an attempt to explain ‘‘puzzling’’ investment behavior, our aspi-
rational setup is certainly not alone; for example, prospect theory is a
prominent alternative. While not always successful (see Barberis and
Xiong (2009)), versions of Prospect Theory – e.g., dynamic versions of
Cumulative Prospect Theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992; Barberis,
2012; Ebert and Strack, 2015) – do deliver unified explanations for
risk-taking behaviors such as the preference for skewness, and simul-
taneously, the disposition effect (Heimer et al., 2023). In this section,
we discuss how the aspirational model can also generate aspects of the
disposition effect, but also be clear about its limitations in its ability to
do so.

4.1.  The disposition effect: A decomposition

The disposition effect (DE), as introduced by Shefrin and Statman

(1985), is:

[Full DE] The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers too
long.

This definition has both a cross-sectional and a temporal component.
Cross-sectionally,  the  investor  tends  to  keep  the  losers  and  sell  the
winners, within the cross-section of her portfolio of stocks. Over time
(temporally), this would manifest itself as the investor’s overall ten-
dency to sell the portfolio of stock investments when it is winning, and
retain it when it is losing.12 We introduce a ‘‘weak disposition effect’’
that  pertains  to  the  second  (temporal)  component,  but  not  the  first
(cross-sectional):

[Weak DE] The disposition to sell too early when winning and ride
too long when losing.

The second definition is weak in the sense that the ‘‘Full DE’’ would
imply the ‘‘Weak DE’’, but not the other way around. What we show
in the following (sub)section is that the aspirational utility generates
‘‘Weak DE’’, but not the ‘‘Full DE’’.

The reason that the aspirational model falls short of the ‘‘Full DE’’ is
as follows: Apart from the notion of an aspiration, our model is based on
optimization 𝑖.𝑒., is ‘‘rational’’. Because only the return on the portfolio

12 That is, given that winning portfolios are more likely to contain more
winners than losers, the investor’s cross-sectional inclination to sell the winners
and hold on to the losers would – averaged over time – result in a tendency
to sell winning portfolios and hold on to losing portfolios.

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 4. Various power utility functions (CRRA utility functions) with different coefficients of relative risk aversion (𝛾). The case of 𝛾 = 1 represents log utility. All utility functions
pass through the point (𝐶 , 𝑢(𝐶)) = (1, 0).

of  stocks  is  relevant  for  optimization,  rationality  reduces  the  cross-
section of returns to a single return on the portfolio, thereby making
it impossible to deliver predictions in the cross-section. The disposition
effect, on the other hand, requires that agents behave as if they have
a psychological attachment to the particular stock that incurred losses.
For example, after a fall in stock price, they should refuse to realize this
loss to switch to a different stock with an identical return distribution,
even  when  one  can  obtain  tax  benefits  by  doing  so  (Constantinides
(1983, 1984)). It is for this reason that explanations of the disposition
effect – including prospect theory – typically involve cognitive biases
(e.g.,  ‘‘mental  accounting’’)  applied  to  each  asset individually.  While
this  may  not  be  inappropriate  for  models  like  prospect  theory  that
already carry a heavily psychological flavor, it may be less compatible
with a model that aims to be more microfounded, as does ours. Since
the ‘‘Weak’’ DE does not require cross-sectional predictions, this is the
extent  to  which  our  model  generates  the  disposition  effect,  at  least
under our current simple setup.13

4.2.  Aspirational utility and the (weak) disposition effect

We first illustrate intuitively, through an example, how an aspira-
tion can generate the ‘‘weaker’’ version of the disposition effect, which
we subsequently supplement with a formal test: Consider an investor
holding  a  wealth  (𝑊0)  worth  $57,000,  with  an  aspiration  to  reach
𝑅 =  $65, 000 within the next 12 months to buy a ‘‘dream-car’’. (We
change the previous notation, ‘𝐶0’, to 𝑊0 in line with our current focus
on investments.) To this end, she invests 46% of 𝑊 into a portfolio

13 We conjecture, however, that it may be possible to push the aspirational
model to target the ‘‘Full DE’’ by adding additional structure, for instance, by
assuming a negative relationship between volatility and expected returns. As
we explain in the next subsection, aspiration generates the tendency to ‘‘sell
when winning and hold on when losing’’ because the distance to the aspiration
increases  (decreases)  with  loss  (gain),  calling  for  the  addition  of  volatility
into the portfolio when it is losing. Assuming a negative relationship between
volatility and returns could deliver a cross-sectional disposition effect (‘‘Full’’
DE) because the aspirational investor would seek to keep the more volatile
(losing) stock when the portfolio is losing, in order to bridge the widening gap
between her current position and the aspiration. In short, the cross-sectional
disposition would arise under the said assumption because volatility would be
more valued in the losing states, whence they would keep the losers (more
volatile stocks). A formal argument would call for a model, which we leave
for future research.

of stocks, the rest in a risk-less bond. Suppose she is lucky during the
first 6 months; her stocks perform well, her wealth increases to 𝑊 =
$65, 000, hence realizes her aspiration precociously. Given that ‘𝑊 =
𝑅’, volatility is an enemy during the remaining 6 months, potentially
jeopardizing the aspiration that is already held in her hand. Hence,
the investor optimally chooses to ‘‘realize the gain early (6 months)’’.
Now conversely, consider a situation where the investor experiences
a loss in the first 6 months. In this case, volatility is a (perhaps the
only) friend during the remaining months; maintaining a high stake
in stocks is the only way to fill the enlarged gap between the reality
and her aspiration. Hence, the aspirational investor chooses to ‘‘hold on
to losses’’. These behaviors are consistent with the (weak) disposition
effect, and is essentially illustrated, respectively, by the green and red
arrows of sub-tree ‘𝐀’ in Fig. 5.14

The aforementioned logic only works when the aspiration is neither
too close, nor too far. If the aspiration is ‘‘too close’’, it can essentially
be reached by investing in bonds alone, hence little reason to condition
the investment behavior on stock performance as they should if under
the disposition effect. If the aspiration is ‘‘too far’’, even a small drop
in stock price can render the aspiration irrelevant, whence the aspirant
reverts to CRRA. In ‘‘ Theorem 2-talk’’, the agent passes from ‘‘Autumn’’
to  ‘‘Winter’’,  effectively  forcing  her  to  relinquish  the  aspiration  and
cut  losses (𝑤𝑆 =  63% → 𝑤𝑆 =  16%),  as  is  shown  in  sub-tree 𝐁 of
Fig.  5.  These  behaviors  are  inconsistent  with  the  disposition  effect,
and shows that aspirations must be in a ‘‘Goldilocks zone’’ to work.
This  qualification,  however,  is  sensible,  since  the  very  definition  of
an aspiration carries the premise that it is neither too close (in which
case, nothing to aspire to) nor too far (in which case, merely a remote
fantasy).

We validate the logic outlined above in a more standard test of the
disposition effect, following the method in Barberis and Xiong (2009)
ratio (Odean, 1998), Proportion of Gains Realized
who report the 𝑃 𝐺 𝑅
, over
Proportion of Losses Realized
𝑃 𝐿𝑅
a simulated stream of stock price realizations. As the disposition effect
is  the  relative  fondness  to  realize  gains  (than  losses),  ‘ 𝑃 𝐺 𝑅
> 1’
𝑃 𝐿𝑅

14 The change in optimal weights in sub-tree A is rather exaggerated (𝑒.𝑔 .,
𝑤𝑠 =  46% → 𝑤𝑠 =  1% or 𝑤𝑠 =  46% → 𝑤𝑠 =  97%)  due  to  the  fact  that
this is the penultimate node, which we focus on for expositional purposes.
These movements are modulated when further away from the final nodes, for
example, as can be seen in the first node with 𝑇 = 0 m. Clearly, this realism
will eventually dominate as the number of 𝑇 -intervals increases (𝑖.𝑒., with a
finer grid).

9 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 5. Dynamic ‘stock-vs-bond’ portfolio optimization tree under aspirational utility. The horizontal axis is the portfolio value of wealth (𝑊 , in units of $). The vertical axis
represents time (𝑇 , in units of 6 months). The top node at 𝑇 = 0 m denotes the original node. Nodes at 𝑇 = 18 m are the final nodes where the outcomes are realized with
aspirational utility (pink graph). Nodes at 𝑇 = 6 m and 𝑇 = 12 m represent interim optimization results. 𝑤𝑆 represent the percentage of (optimal) allocation into the stock.
Parameter values are ‘‘standard’’: 𝑊0 = 50 k, 𝑅 = 65 k, 𝜇𝑆 = 1.06; 𝜎2
𝑆 = 0.2, 𝑅𝑓 = 1.01 (annualized); 𝛾 = 1.1 (risk-aversion), 𝛿 = 0.9 (discount). Green arrows denote ‘‘selling the
winner’’, red arrows ‘‘riding the loser’’; both consistent with the disposition effect. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)

Table 2
This reports the 𝑃 𝐺 𝑅
ratio across two dimensions: the location of the aspiration point, 𝑅 (in units of $1,000); and 𝑁𝑇 , the
𝑃 𝐿𝑅
number of sub-periods within the investment period (𝑁𝑇 = 3, 4, 5 from top to bottom row). 𝑊0 is fixed at 𝑊0 = 50 k, while
𝑅 is varied 50 k∼ 80 k. All other parameters (𝑒.𝑔 ., bond and stock returns, discount rate, etc.) are recycled from Fig. 5. The
highlighted cells indicate ‘ 𝑃 𝐺 𝑅
𝑃 𝐿𝑅
52.5

> 1’, where the disposition effect is observed.

57.5

62.5

67.5

72.5

77.5

55

50

60

65

70

75

80

R

𝑁𝑇

3
4
5

0.00
0.40
1.00

2.00
0.75
∞

1.00
5.00
9.33

2.00
4.50
5.35

2.00
4.50
2.63

2.00
3.00
1.46

2.00
1.00
1.13

1.00
1.33
1.43

2.00
0.60
1.93

0.67
0.44
1.14

0.67
0.53
1.17

0.67
0.75
0.89

0.67
0.75
0.80

signals the disposition effect. The only material difference (to Barberis
and  Xiong (2009)),  other  than  the  utility  being  tested  (aspirational
vs  prospect  theory),  is  that  we  only  track  the  temporal  investment
behavior, and not the cross-section, for the aforementioned reasons.
We  report  the  results  in Table  2.  Modulo  some  aberrations  due  to
discretization, the presence of the disposition effect is evident within
the ‘‘Goldilocks’’ range of 𝑅, around 55 k ∼ 70 k. See Appendix C for
details of the methodology and some additional results.

5.  Aspiration and stock-market participation

The aspirational utility delivers some predictions on stock-market
predictions. This feature is particularly important as an explanation for
the disposition effect. We also discuss how the discontinuity generated
by  the  aspiration  may  shed  a  novel,  skewness-based  perspective  on
some well-known puzzles in household finance.

5.1.  The simultaneous generation of risk-taking and the disposition effect

As  noted  above,  there  are  versions  of  prospect  theory  that  can
generate  the  disposition  effect.  One  shortcoming  of  prospect  theory
in this regard, however, is that this explanation relates most to those
who  are least
likely  to  participate  in  the  stock  market  at  the  first
place — namely, those that are most pessimistic about future expected
returns (Barberis and Xiong, 2009). For this reason, it has been argued
that a suitable explanation for the disposition effect must also generate
strong stock market participation simultaneously (Heimer, 2016). Our
aspirational utility meets this standard. Aspiration provides a natural
reason to take risk and participate in the stock market: the pressure

to attain the aspiration. This can also be deduced from the fact that
aspirational utility – just like the Friedman and Savage (1948) utility –
exhibits both a concave and a convex segment where risk is sought,
presumably  leading  to  higher  participation  in  the  stock  market.  As
an example, Fig. 6 compares the optimal stock allocations of a CRRA
against an agent with aspiration 𝑅 –who are otherwise equal,– showing
an increase (24% → 59%) when aspiration is introduced. This exempli-
fies a general fact that is easy to show: Under a standard bond-stock
optimization problem with aspirational utility, the allocation on stock
(𝑤𝑆 ) increases monotonically in 𝑅 − 𝐶0, up to a threshold after which
the agent reverts back to CRRA.

The above analysis illustrates that aspiration can act as a ‘‘common
factor’’ which, on the one hand, promotes risk-taking such as in the
stock market, while on the other, the same factor also generates the
(weak) disposition effect. Thus, an aspiration-based explanation of the
disposition effect is well-targeted – 𝑖.𝑒., it pertains to a group of people
who have a clear reason to take risks in the stock market at the first
place – a potential advantage over the explanation based on prospect
theory. Lastly, we note that the above analysis assumes – as it is in
conjunction  with  the  disposition  effect  –  that  agents  are  reasonably
wealthy, in the sense that they are in the ‘‘Goldilocks’’ proximity to the
aspiration (𝑅). In the next subsection, we focus on a different wealth
segment; the investment behavior of those with relatively low wealth.

5.2.  The puzzling investment behavior of the low-income households

A long-standing puzzle in household finance is that stock-market
participation is significantly lower than what is anticipated by theory,

10 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 6. This single-period simplification of Fig. 5 compares the optimal bond-stock portfolio allocations in a standard CRRA utility (Panel 𝐀; 𝛿 = 1) against that of an agent with
an aspirational utility (Panel 𝐁). Other than then presence of a reference point 𝑅 = 65 k in 𝐁, the parameters in 𝐀 and 𝐁 are identical, and are generated from the setup in Fig. 5.

especially for  the  lower  segment  of  the  wealth  distribution  (hence-
forth low-income  households).  For  example, Campbell (2006)  reports
that  only  about  20%  of  the  population  in  the  lower  quartile  of  the
wealth distribution participate in the stock market, whereas standard
portfolio optimization dictates that all investors should allocate at least
a portion of their asset into stocks (𝑖.𝑒., 100% participation). A separate,
but  important  finding  in  this  literature  is  that  low-income  investors
hardly diversify their portfolios (e.g., Goetzmann and Kumar (2008)),
which is puzzling because they can presumably do better by reducing
idiosycratic risk. Given the difficulty to find a rational explanation for
these phenomena, they are often attributed to cognitive factors, such
as ignorance, bias, herding, and over-confidence.15

Our aspirational model offers an alternative, yet unified interpreta-
tion for these puzzles. First, the lackluster stock-market participation
among the low-income households is well in accord with our skew-
ness  perspective.  Our  model  predicts  that  the  low-wealthed  would
choose positively skewed gambles over (the relatively symmetrically
distributed)  stocks,  alluding  to  the  possibility  that  the  low-income
households  are  optimally  diverting  their  investments  towards  assets
with more skewed payoffs, in lieu of stocks.16 Operationally, this could
take the form of participation in the lottery market; investing in call
options  (or  fractions  of  options,  especially  for  those  with  low  re-
sources); or more recently, cryptocurrency (whose returns have been
documented to be positively skewed; for example, Iyer and Popescu
(2023)) and ‘‘meme-stocks’’. While these clearly cannot substitute for a
direct empirical validation, it is nonetheless corroborated by the abun-
dance of evidence that those with lower income tend to invest higher
portions of their income into lotteries (e.g., Clotfelter and Cook (1991),
Clotfelter (2000), Rubenstein and Scafidi (2002)). These findings are
consistent with our proposed narrative that the low-income households
are redirecting their investment away from stocks, and into positively
skewed assets.

Second,  the  lack  of  diversification  in  the  portfolios  held  by  the
low-income  households  may  also  be  an optimally skewed  response,
rather  than  a  ‘‘failure  to  diversify’’.  Since  individual  stock  returns
are generally positively skewed whereas the return on the market is
negatively  skewed  (Albuquerque, 2012),  an  under-diversified  invest-
ment implies higher exposure to positive skewness in their portfolio.

15 A  notable  exception  to  this,  at  least  as  an  explanation  for  the  low
participation  rate  in  the  stock  market,  is  the  introduction  of  a  fixed  (or
on-going) participation cost.
16 One may argue that it is possible to dynamically generate positive skew-
ness, even with a relatively symmetric payoff (as stocks), by committing to sell
upon a modest loss and hold on until high gains are achieved, as in Barberis
(2012). However, as Barberis (2012) shows, this strategy is vulnerable to a
dynamic inconsistency problem, making it unlikely to be used as a widespread
instrument to target positive skewness.

Again,  this  is  in  line  with  the  prediction  of  the  aspirational  model,
namely that those with lower wealth (𝐶0) will seek more positively
skewed gambles. As 𝐶0 increases, the empirical finding is that investors
incrementally  tend  to  choose  more  diversified  portfolio  (𝑒.𝑔.  mutual
funds),  which  would  reduce  the  skewness  profile  as  it  more  closely
mirrors the market portfolio. In the context of our model, this simply
represents  a  migration  from  ‘‘Autumn’’  to  ‘‘Summer’’.  Again,  while
these are admittedly anecdotal, it is also corroborated by the finding
that those who engage in skewed gambles (lotteries) also tend to be
holders of undiversified, lottery-like stocks (Kumar, 2009), indicating
that the lack of diversification is indeed likely to be a manifestation of
a preference for positive skewness.

5.3.  Stock-market investment behavior across the wealth distribution

Given that aspirations are not exclusively for the low-income house-
holds,  there  is  a  possibility  that  our  aspirational  model  can  deliver
predictions  on  the  stock-market  investment  behavior  across  a  wider
spectrum of the wealth distribution than just the lower end. However,
the obvious challenge here is that aspirations are personal and unob-
servable. Moreover, any aspiration that supposedly impacts the prices
of publicly traded assets – such as stocks – must be commonly shared
by many, otherwise they would be washed away in the aggregate. We
nevertheless conjecture that there are at least two aspirations common
enough  to  be  priced  macroeconomically:  (1)  the  aspiration  to  ‘‘es-
cape poverty’’ (Shefrin and Statman, 2000), and (2) the aspiration for
‘‘upper-class lifestyle’’. This bifurcation is analogous to the observation
made in the SP/A theory of Lopes (1987) – and later re-introduced
in Shefrin and Statman (2000)’s BPT theory – that farmers plant two
distinct crops; ‘‘food crops’’ and ‘‘cash crops’’ where the former is used
to ensure subsistence, and the latter to gamble on ‘‘hope’’. A similar
preference appears in investment strategy, for example, the ‘‘barbell’’
combination of extremely safe and risky assets.17 A recent paper by Bali
et al. (2023) lends support to this possibility of double aspiration. In
a  nutshell,  they  find  that,  interestingly,  the  wealthy  gamble  in  the
stock market in a fashion much similar to the low-income households.
Roughly  speaking,  this  similarity  alludes  to  a  common  feature  that
drives investment behavior across class – aspiration.

To see how Bali et al. (2023) supports our aspirational narrative, we
first outline their finding: (𝑖) The low-income households demand stocks
with higher idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL), and this demand decreases
with wealth. This is in line with Kumar (2009)’s finding that the low-
income investors seek high-IVOL and positively-skewed stocks. [𝑊 ↑⇒
IVOL demand ↓ & Skewness demand ↓] (𝑖𝑖) Importantly, this trend is

17 N. N. Taleb named this a ‘‘barbell strategy’’ (Taleb, 2007) - investing a
large part of the portfolio in a safe asset (e.g., T-bills) and a small portion in
a high-risk asset.

11 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

positive skewness is sought and the choice of volatility increases with
(𝑝∗, and hence) 𝑊 . Intuitively, this is the wealth segment where the
fierce aspiration for ‘upper class status’ forces the agents to gamble –
much in the way the low-income households gamble to shoot out of
poverty – taking on increasingly more risk as their wealth increase.
As such, ‘finding (𝑖𝑖𝑖)’ has a natural interpretation in our model: The
wealthy are treating status as an ‘‘ambitious’’ aspiration that would best
be addressed by positively skewed gambles (𝑝∗ < 1
2

).

6.  Discussion: Existing theories based on social interactions

Thus far, we (mostly) compared the predictions of our aspirational
model  against  those  of  prospect  theory.  A  separate,  but  burgeoning
strand  of  literature  emphasizes  the  role  of social  interaction on  in-
vestment behavior, in the spirit of Hirshleifer (2015)’s call that ‘‘the
time has come to move beyond behavioral finance to social finance"
and Becker (1974)’s notion of ‘‘social utility’’. The idea is that invest-
ments do not happen in vacuum, and social interactions can shape the
way people invest. For example, it may increase stock market participa-
tion (Hong et al., 2004), make investors more reluctant to admit their
losses (Shefrin and Statman, 1985) and more enthusiastic to advertise
their gains (Han et al., 2022; Heimer and Simon, 2015). Heimer (2016)
suggests that these forces generated by social interactions can lead to
the disposition effect, a conjecture he confirms using data on social
interaction in online investment forums.

Is  it  a  coincidence  that  these  predictions  made  by  the  social-
interaction-based theories – for example, the increased propensity to
take risk, and the generation of the disposition effect – are similar to
those made under our aspirational setup? We think not. Aspirations and
social interactions are inherently connected. For example, consider two
groups; the first group consisting of socially active individuals, and the
second with comparatively more isolated individuals. The presence of
aspiration would be more common in the former group, because the
frequent social interactions would likely exert pressure to purchase the
conspicuous and indivisible goods that motivate our aspirational setup.
Relatedly,  frequent  social  interactions  can  open  up  opportunities  to
‘‘brag’’, the satisfaction of which generates another source of aspiration.
For example, a socially active individual may aspire to the pomp of a
‘‘successful investor’’ she could enjoy – presumably more than would a
reclusive individual – by bragging about the proceeds of her investment
that is now proudly sitting in her bank account. Insofar as anything
‘‘brag-worthy’’ would be a significant distance away from the investor’s
current standing, the desire to brag is a source of aspiration.18 In short,
social  interactions  and  aspirations  are  intricately  connected,  in  the
sense that the former will almost invariably generate the latter.

Given this connection, the predictions from the social interaction-
based theories have a natural interpretation in our aspirational model.
Consider for example, the disposition effect. In the social interaction-
based theory, this is motivated by the need to ‘‘manage impressions’’
when investors engage actively in social interactions (Heimer, 2016).
In the aspirational setup, there is a related, but distinct focus. Here,
social interactions first foster an aspiration, for example, an aspiration
to ‘‘brag’’ with a luxury car. An aspiration-driven investor would feel an
urge to realize the profits from her investments prematurely, as soon as
it arrives at a ‘‘brag-worthy’’ car, providing a reason to sell the gain too
soon.19 Similarly, consider the relationship between social interaction
and the increase in stock market participation. Theories based on social

18 The idea that one can derive utility from ‘‘bragging’’ upon the realization
of a successful investment is in line with the notion of ‘‘realization utility’’, also
known to be a potential source of the disposition effect (Barberis and Xiong,
2012).
19 Clearly,  the  ability  of  an  aspiration  to  generate  the  disposition  effect
depends on the location of 𝑅, relative to 𝐶0. For example, there are cases where
the aspiration is too remote (𝐶0 ≪ 𝑅), hence the agent would dynamically
seek positive skewness (cut losses quickly, ride the gains long) as in Barberis

12 

Fig. 7. This figure provides a pictorial example of Lemma 3 (Appendix) which roughly
states  that  the  optimal  binomial  martingale  gamble  with 𝑝∗ (𝑖.𝑒., the  consumption
scheme that arises as an optimal response to the 𝐸 𝑈 -maximization problem) has the
highest volatility when 𝑝∗ = 1

.

2

subverted in the upper (top 10%) part of the distribution where the
wealthier seek higher IVOL in stocks. [𝑊[90%,100%] ↑⇒ IVOL demand ↑].
They interpret this non-linearity as arising from an increased awareness
for social status among the rich; namely, status is a luxury. (𝑖𝑖𝑖) To sup-
port this interpretation, they offer the finding that conditioning on the
subsample of the rich (top 10%) who also engage in positively skewed
investment behavior – which is often associated with status-seeking in
the literature – tends to reinforce the finding in (𝑖𝑖). [𝑊[90%,100%] ↑⇒
IVOL demand ↑, conditional on positive skewness-seeking.]

).

Since the above findings are centered on IVOL, we briefly pause to
note that in our model, volatility is highest when the optimal choice of
skewness is 𝑝∗ = 1
(symmetric bet). That is, as seen in Fig. 7 below,
2
volatility is lowest in the most skewed bets (left or right) and peaks
when skewness is zero (Lemma 3, Appendix). In fact, this is intuitive
given that skewness is understood in the literature as a tool to seek
‘‘prudence’’ (Menezes et al., 1980; Kimball, 1990) –for example, the
use of positive skewness allows one to ‘‘prudently’’ aim for an ambitious
upside (albeit remotely) without incurring a large downside risk, hence,
minimizing  volatility.  Insofar  as  skewness  can  be  used  as  a  tool  to
‘‘prudently’’ target aspirations, volatility is maximized when skewness
is absent (𝑝∗ = 1
2

With these, the following outlines how Bali et al. (2023)’s findings
support the presence of two separate aspirations in the macroeconomy.
The  fact  that  the  low-income  households  seek  highly  volatile  and
lottery-like stocks (‘finding (𝑖)’) is suggestive that some of them may be
gambling in the stock market to attain their first aspiration, the desire
to escape the pain of poverty. As 𝑊 increases further beyond that of the
low-income households, Bali et al. (2023)’s finding that increments in
wealth (𝑊 ) reduce positive skewness-seeking and IVOL-seeking (𝑖.𝑒.,
‘finding (𝑖)’)  is  also  in  line  with  the  aspirational  prediction  that 𝑝∗
increases (𝑖.𝑒., lower skewness demanded) with 𝑊 (Theorem 4) and
that volatility decreases with 𝑝∗ in that segment of wealth (represented
as  the  ‘green  zone’  in Fig.  7).  Intuitively,  this  means  that  as  the
agents  become  richer,  they  no  longer  need  to  ‘‘gamble  in  the  stock
market’’ to attain their aspirations, hence perhaps would migrate to
skew-neutral or mildly negatively-skewed investments by holding the
market portfolio or corporate bonds. Meanwhile, the subversion of the
aforementioned trend at the top of the wealth distribution (𝑖.𝑒., ‘finding
(𝑖𝑖)’) – where the demand for volatility seems to be rekindled among the
top 10% wealthy – is indicative of an emergence of a new aspiration
as  people  move  up  into  the  top  10%  of  the  wealth  bracket.  This
may quite plausibly be interpreted as the aspiration to join the ‘upper
class’. ‘Finding (𝑖𝑖𝑖)’ –that the demand for volatility increases with 𝑊 ,
conditional on revealed preference for positive skewness — reinforces
this narrative, because this is precisely what our model predicts should
be  the  behavior  of  an  aspirational  agent  when  the  aspiration  is  an
ambitious goal to attain, as is depicted in the ‘red zone’ in Fig. 7 where

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

interactions typically motivate this through the possible reduction in
participation cost (𝑒.𝑔 ., Hong et al. (2004)). Our model primarily fo-
cuses on the aspiration that social interactions can produce, and the
subsequent increase in risk appetite to attain it, resulting in increased
stock market participation when the circumstances are right (𝑖.𝑒., for
those ‘‘wealthy’’ enough). The parallel is clear: Our model supplements
the  literature  on  social  interaction-based  explanations  of  investment
behavior, by focusing on the investment consequences (skewness) of
what  we  believe  is  an  essential  element  of  social  interaction;  the
aspiration it engenders.

7.  Experimental evidence

We have thus far discussed a theory that suggests a reason why an
economic agent may seek skewness in their investments (aspiration),
either  positive  or  negative,  depending  on  the  circumstances.  Mean-
while,  finding  empirical  evidence  for  a  causal  relationship  between
aspirations and skewness-seeking in the real world is complicated by
the  fact  that  researchers  rarely  observe  a  financial  decision  maker’s
intrinsic motivations (𝑒.𝑔. one’s aspirations). Moreover, their decisions
and associated payoffs are highly endogenous, rendering identification
even  harder.  For  these  reasons,  we  conduct  a  controlled  laboratory
experiment to test how the potential aspiration points we induced affect
the skewness-seeking behavior of experimental subjects. Specifically,
we test the claim of Theorem 1, which predicts that the further (closer)
the agent’s current position is from their aspiration point, the more
likely they are to purchase positively (negatively) skewed assets.

The  experiment  took  place  at  the  Marshall  behavioral  research
laboratory  at  the  University  of  Southern  California.  A  total  of  126
subjects participated in one of 13 equally-run experiment sessions, each
consisting  of  20  subjects  according  to  lab  capacity.  In  the  sessions,
subjects submitted their series of choices using pen and paper. This was
an individual decision-making experiment, thus there was no strategic
interaction between participants. Participants were given written in-
structions and were guided through a presentation prior to the start of
the experiment. To ensure proper understanding, they were encouraged
to ask questions both in public and in private and asked to complete a
series of comprehension questions which were checked for errors prior
to the start of the experiment. Sessions lasted between 50–60 min and
subjects earned on average $20 including a $5 show-up fee.

The  experiment  consisted  of  two  separate  studies  both  of  which
were incorporated in the same experimental session (𝑖.𝑒., all subjects
participated in both experimental studies). Each session was split into
three  parts,  sections  1,  2  and  3,  which  were  completed  in  order.
Sections 1 and 3 conducted the first experimental study while Section 2
conducted the second study. Each section consisted of 10 rounds, for a
total of 30 rounds. Each round consisted of a menu of (two, three or
five) binary lotteries.20 out of which the participant had to select one
by circling the appropriate letter (‘‘A’’, ‘‘B’’, ‘‘C’’, ‘‘D’’, ‘‘E’’) representing
that lottery. At the end of the experiment one of the 30 rounds was
selected  at  random  for  payment  and  the  choice  for  that  round  was
executed  for  each  participant  using  3-sided  and  10-sided  dice.  An
example round is shown in Fig. 8 (Appendix D lists all rounds in detail.)

(2012), quite the contrary to the disposition effect. As reasoned above, in our
model, this constitutes the upper boundary of the ‘‘Goldilocks zone’’, where the
aspiration is too remote to generate the disposition effect. In general, however,
when 𝑅 resides within the Goldilocks zone, the aspirational agent perceives the
gain as ‘‘getting closer’’ to her aspiration, and hence, reduces the exposure to
the winning stock, generating a behavior that is consistent with the disposition
effect. (See Appendix C for further details on how skewness can be generated
dynamically in the aspirational setup.)
20 This corresponds to ‘‘binomial martingale’’ in the theory part. We used
the term ‘‘binary lottery’’ to our subjects instead because (1) it makes more
colloquial sense and (2) we generalize the gambles to have non-zero means.

Each binary lottery clearly indicated two possible monetary rewards
in $ amounts each with a corresponding % chance of happening. Since
lottery outcome was determined using a 10-sided die, the die number
which  corresponded  to  each  monetary  outcome  was  also  stated  for
additional clarity - 𝑒.𝑔. 10-sided die numbers 0–4 will correspond to
$10  (50%  chance),  and  numbers  5–9  will  correspond  to  $20  (50%
chance).  A  potential  aspiration  point  was  induced  through  what  we
called a ‘‘Donation threshold’’ $ amount. This referred to the minimum
monetary amount that if a participant reached in the randomly chosen
round  then  we  (the  experimenters)  would  donate  a  $25  amount  to
a  charity  organization  chosen  by  the  participant  (out  of  a  list  that
we provided at the start of the experiment). Note that the ‘‘Donation
threshold’’  was  round-specific  while  the  $25  donation  amount  was
constant. Whether a participant achieved the donation or not had no
impact on her monetary earnings from her choices. Finally, only the
round chosen for payment was relevant for the potential donation. Thus
the  aspiration  point  (the  location)  varied  between  rounds  while  the
donation amount was kept constant.

7.1.  Study 1: Within-subject test of preference reversals

Study  1  was  conducted  in  sections  1  and  3  of  our  experimental
sessions. It followed a within-subject design, meaning that all subjects
faced the same questions in the first and last section of the experiment.
Since the study involved checking for preference reversals (𝑖.𝑒., a sub-
ject faced the same lottery twice) we split the study into two sections –
before and after Study 2 – to ensure that the purpose of the study was
not obvious to the participants.

7.1.1.  Experimental design

All 20 rounds involved choices between two binary lotteries, ‘‘A’’
and  ‘‘B’’.  The  two  lotteries  within  each  round  always  had  the  same
mean and standard deviation. Since binary lotteries are uniquely de-
fined by their first three moments, the only difference between the two
lotteries  was  the  level  of  skewness,  with  lottery  ‘‘A’’  always  having
zero  skewness  (𝑖.𝑒. a  50%  chance  of  each  outcome)  and  option  ‘‘B’’
being either positively (1.5 or 2.7) or negatively (−1.5 or −2.7) skewed.
Both section 1 and section 3 consisted of 10 rounds. Each round (pair
of  lotteries)  in  section  1  had  its  exact  same  counterpart  in  section
3.  In  other  words,  a  round  was  presented  twice,  once  in  section  1
and once in section 3, but with different donation thresholds — that
was the ‘‘treatment’’ in this study. Always, in one of the two rounds
with the same lotteries, the donation threshold was not attainable by
any of the potential earnings in the two lotteries. Therefore, in this
control scenario, the choice is unaffected by the potential aspiration
point of the donation. In the other case, the counterpart round, the
donation threshold was attainable by either lottery B (for lottery pairs
with a zero and a positively skewed lottery) or both choices A and B
(for lottery pairs with a zero and a negatively skewed lottery), with
choice B potentially maximizing the chance of attaining the threshold.
This part served as the treatment choice — the choice impacted by
the potential aspiration point of the donation. Within the total of 10
unique combinations of binary lotteries we varied the expected value
and standard deviation to test whether the first two moments played
a role in the decision to switch skewness preference in the presence of
the aspiration. Appendix D details the moments of each round.

The motivation here is to see whether we can identify (and whether
they  exist)  circumstances  under  which  a  participant  may  prefer  the
less  skewed  option  (lottery  ‘‘A’’)  when  not  affected  by  a  potential
donation aspiration but may then opt to seek more skewness - positive
or negative - (lottery ‘‘B’’) when the aspiration is attainable - as our
theory suggests. In our design that would be reflected as the revealed
preference  choices  ‘‘AB’’,  where  the  first  letter  indicates  the  choice
under  no  induced  aspiration  and  the  second  letter  would  indicates
the  choice  under  the  induced  aspiration.  Note  that  our  design  does
not preclude the presence of other intrinsic aspiration points (𝑒.𝑔. a

13 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 8. Round 3 of Section 1. By choosing lottery ‘‘A’’, the subject will have the chance to earn $8 with 50% probability (if the 10-sided die rolls 1,2,3,4,5) or $14 with 50%
probability (if the 10-sided die rolls 6,7,8,9,10). Since only the $14 reward is at least as much the ‘‘Donation threshold’’ of $9, the subject has a 50% chance of achieving the $25
donation to her chosen charity. Conversely, by choosing lottery ‘‘B’’, the subject will have the chance to earn $2 with 10% probability or $12 with 90% probability depending
on the 10-sided die roll. The subject now has a 90% chance of achieving the donation since the $12 is above the ‘‘Donation threshold’’. Notice that both lotteries have the same
expected value ($11) and standard deviation ($3) but differ in the skewness (0 versus −2.7).

Table 3
The first [second] letter indicates the lottery choice in the control [treatment] part of each pair of lotteries.
i.e. The ‘‘AB’’ row indicates the % of times that participants chose the zero skewed option in the control
part (lottery ‘‘A’’) and the skewed option in the treatment part (lottery ‘‘B’’).
Revealed
preference

All lottery
pairs

Pairs with
{0, +ve} skewness
27.62%
23.02%
15.04%
33.97%

Pairs with
{0, −ve} skewness
41.75%
18.41%
12.06%
27.78%

AA
AB
BA
BB

34.68%
20.71%
13.73%
30.87%

Total
N = 1260 (2,520 ‘‘A’’ or ‘‘B’’ paired choices.)

100%

100%

100%

participant may aspire to leave the experiment with ‘$10’ or more), nor
does it always guarantee that our induced aspiration points are relevant
to  all  participants  (𝑒.𝑔.  some  may  not  care  for  any  of  the  charities
that we presented or in an extreme case may receive disutility from
charitable donation). We did not design the experiment to answer these
questions for individual subjects and so we rely on averages to test our
hypotheses.

7.1.2.  Results

A total of 126 subjects generated 2520 choices (20 choices each
across two sections). Option A (the zero skewed option) was chosen
52% of the time while option B (the skewed option) 48% of the time.
Breaking down these numbers by the rounds that involve (zero-skewed,
positively  skewed)  pairs  vs.  (zero-skewed,  negatively  skewed)  pairs,
option A was chosen 47% and 57% of the time while option B 53%
and 43% of the times respectively. Turning to our object of interest –
preferences over pairs in the control and treatment – Table 3 shows
the  %  of  times  that  each  pair  {AA,  AB,  BA,  BB}  was  chosen  by  all
participants for all rounds. Choice pairs ‘‘AA’’ or ‘‘BB’’ indicate that the
participant did not exhibit a preference reversal (𝑖.𝑒. they revealed a
stable choice of skewness) in the presence of a potential aspiration.
The distinction between the two cases is that while in ‘‘AA’’ the par-
ticipants intrinsically preferred the less skewed option, ‘‘BB’’ indicates
an intrinsic preference for the more skewed option (regardless of the
presence of aspiration). Participants choosing ‘‘AB’’ would showcase a
preference reversal in the direction that our hypothesis predicts, 𝑖.𝑒.
preference for the less skewed option in the absence of the potential
aspiration coupled with a preference reversal (demand for the more
skewed option) when the possibility of achieving an aspiration point
is present. Finally ‘‘BA’’ choices indicate the opposite, 𝑖.𝑒. a participant
seeking less skewness even when donation was achievable by seeking
more.

The  majority  of  the  choices  (65.55%)  were  stable  (‘‘AA’’,  ‘‘BB’’),
𝑖.𝑒. unaffected  by  the  presence  of  the  potential  donation.  This  tells
us that participants understood the experiment and were clearly not
randomizing.  This  stability  is  natural  in  light  of  the  strong  intrinsic
heterogeneity  we  observe  across  the  participants  in  their  preference
for skewness. (See the paragraph below.) That is, some participants are
intrinsically drawn to skewed options whereas others prefer to be less
skewed, regardless of the presence of aspiration. Hence, we refer to
these stable choices (‘‘AA’’ and ‘‘BB’’) as the ‘‘baseline of inactivity’’. We
focus on revealed preference reversals (‘‘AB’’ and ‘‘BA’’) that occur over

20.71%
20.71%+13.73%

and above this ‘‘baseline of inactivity’’. To recall, our theory predicts
a reversal of ‘‘AB’’, and not ‘‘BA’’. Our results match these predictions.
Of these choices that do exhibit preference reversals (34.44%), the ma-
= 60.13%) are preference reversals in the direction
jority (
predicted by our hypothesis. This finding is qualitatively stable if we
split the choices across pairs with zero-positive or zero-negative skewed
pairs remains. We also find qualitatively similar results if we further
split the sample into choices involving pairs with skewness of {(0, 1.5),
(0, 2.7), (0, −1.5), (0, −2.7)} and further if we examine each lottery
pair combination. (See Appendix D.) There does not seem to be any
systematic pattern regarding the preference reversals with the means
and  variances  of  the  lotteries.  Thus,  we  conclude  that  our  induced
potential aspiration points, on average, seem to cause participants to
exhibit additional demand for skewness.

#𝐴𝐵
#𝐴𝐴+#𝐴𝐵

We  further  report  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  the  preference  re-
versal. Fig. 9 (left panel) shows the histogram of the number of ‘‘AB’’
preference reversals observed per participant. The histogram seemingly
shows  that  each  participant  can  be  reliably  expected  to  exhibit  a
preference reversal between zero to four times. However, this statistic
overlooks the wide range of intrinsic preference for skewness of each
participant. Fig. 9 (right panel) shows the histogram of the ratio of
preference reversals (𝑖.𝑒. ‘‘AB’’) to choosing ‘‘A’’ in the control choice
, per participant. This is a sharper statistic
(𝑖.𝑒. ‘‘AA’’ + ‘‘AB’’),
because it shows, in percentage terms, the distribution of preference
reversals  (in  face  of  a  potential  aspiration), conditional on  such  a
reversal being feasible (𝑖.𝑒. the less skewed option chosen in the con-
trol).21 Interestingly, we observe that while most participants exhibit
a  preference  reversal  between  zero  to  four  times  (left  panel),  this
does  not  take  into  account  the  intrinsic  preferences  for  skewness  of
each participant. If we exclude all the choices where option ‘‘B’’ was
chosen  in  the  control  part,  we  find  substantial  heterogeneity  across
the participants: some participants never demand additional skewness,
while  others  always  demand  more  skewness  under  the  presence  of
the aspiration. Thus, the induced aspiration of a potential charitable
donation has very differential effects on the skewness-seeking of our
participants. We interpret this as arising from the differences in the
intrinsic strength of skewness preferences of each participant.22

A drawback of Study 1 is that participants often chose option ‘‘B’’
(the skewed option) in the control part, meaning that there was no

21 Note that if the participant revealed preference for the skewed option in
the control part (𝑖.𝑒. ‘‘B’’), then we have no way of checking whether he or

14 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 9. Left: Histogram of number of preference reversals ‘‘AB’’ per participant. Right: Ratio of ‘‘AB’’ over all such possible choices (‘‘AB’’ + ‘‘AA’’) - Choices of ‘‘B’’ in the control
part are excluded since for those we cannot examine a potential preference reversal for additional skewness seeking.

more skewed option for them to choose in the treatment part where
the aspiration point is achievable. This led to the disposal of a sizable
number of observations. Study 2 complements Study 1 by overcoming
this problem, as well as adding an additional dimension to the analysis.

7.2.  Study 2: Between-subject test of skewness preferences with aspiration
shifts

7.2.1.  Experimental design

Study  2  was  designed  as  an  alternative  framework  to  ‘Study  1’,
to overcome some of the aforementioned limits and to function as a
robustness check that facilitates more in-depth analysis. Study 2 was
conducted  in  section  2 of  our  experimental  sessions  and in  contrast
to Study 1, it varied between subjects in three treatments (that were
varied  over  the  donation  threshold).  Subjects  were  faced  with  10
rounds.  Each  round  involved  a  number  of  lotteries  (either  3  or  5)
out  of  which  the  subject  was  asked  to  select  one.  Thus,  from  the
subjects’ perspective, the task was similar to Study 1 (sections 1 and 3),
apart from the number of lotteries available in each round. From the
researcher’s perspective however, the higher number of binary lottery
choices (same mean and variance) allowed us to qualitatively test for
movements  along  the  skewness  dimension  that  is  predicted  by  our
model.  In  addition,  by  utilizing  a  between-subject  design  and  since
each subject was made to encounter the same lottery only once, we
overcome any potential issues related to experimenter demand effects
that Study 1 may be subject to.

Across  participants,  the  10  rounds  differed  only  in  the  donation
threshold (location of the potential utility jump), 𝑖.𝑒. all participants
faced the same lottery choices in each round, but with possibly different
donation thresholds. Each lottery within a round was marked with a
letter (‘‘A’’, ‘‘B’’, ‘‘C’’, ‘‘D’’, ‘‘E’’) in order of the magnitude of skewness,
with ‘‘A’’ being the most negatively skewed lottery and ‘‘C’’ (in the 3-
choice rounds) or ‘‘E’’ (in the 5-choice rounds) being the most positive
skewed lottery. The middle option (‘‘B’’ or ‘‘C’’ respectively) was the
zero-skewness lottery. All lottery choices are depicted in Appendix D.
What  we  are  testing  in  Study  2  is  whether  manipulations  in  the
location of the potential utility jump (donation threshold) cause qual-
itative changes to the types of lotteries chosen. More specifically, will
participants  choose  more  positively  [negatively]  skewed  lotteries  as
the donation threshold increases [decreases]? While we are not able
to make quantitative predictions due to the absence of other measures

like the risk aversion parameter, or the size/location of the utility jump
due  to  the  $25  donation,  this  is  a  useful  exercise  that  qualitatively
showcases  the  mechanics  of  our  model:  the  potential  presence  of  a
non-monetary  aspiration  point  (representing  a  discontinuous  utility
jump)  can  affect  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  skewness  that  is
sought in financial decision making. Thus what we expect to observe
is that an increase [decrease] in the donation threshold will cause, on
average in our sample, a more positive [negative] skewness seeking, or
equivalently, lean towards the lottery that ‘‘maximizes the probability
of donation’’.23

The example in Fig. 10 provides an illustration of the three treat-
ments and our hypotheses: The binary lotteries ‘‘A’’, ‘‘B’’, ‘‘C’’, have the
same first two moments (mean = 11, standard deviation = 3). Thus,
from the property of binary lotteries, the skewness (third moment) of
each  uniquely  determines  each  lottery  (skewness  =  {−2.7,  0,  +2.7}
respectively). Participants in all three treatments faced the same lotter-
ies. What varied across treatments is the ‘‘donation threshold’’. Fig. 10
shows a donation threshold of $11. In this case, a participant seeking
to maximize the probability of reaching the donation threshold should
choose lottery ‘‘A’’. In another treatment, the donation threshold was
somewhere in the range (12, 14]. Thus a participant in that treatment,
seeking to maximize the probability of reaching that threshold should
choose lottery ‘‘B’’. Finally, the highest threshold would be in the range
of (14, 20]. Participants in such treatments should choose ‘‘C’’ if they
are  to  have  any  chance  of  reaching  the  threshold.  Of  course,  other
factors  affect  the  lottery  choice  (intrinsic  skewness  preferences,  size
and direction of the utility jump from the donation). However, random
assignment to treatments means that, we should expect those factors
to average out across treatment groups. Thus, if at least some of our
participants receive positive utility from making a donation to their
chosen  charity,  our  model  predicts  that,  as  the  donation  threshold
increases  [decreases],  participants  will  be  more  likely  to  choose  a
lottery with more positive [negative] skewness.

7.2.2.  Results

A total of 126 subjects generated 1260 choices (10 choices each)
– 1008 from eight rounds of three lottery choices and 252 from two
rounds  of  five  lottery  choices.  For  our  main  analysis,  we  examine
whether the distribution of choices changes across treatments (locations
of the donation threshold), and if so, how. To do that, we pool together
all rounds with three lottery choices. We can do that because lottery
‘‘A’’ is always negatively skewed, lottery ‘‘B’’ has always zero skewness

she would demand more skewness in the presence of the aspiration since there
was no more skewed option to choose from.
22 Alternative explanations may include: variances in the size of the utility
jump due to the donation (𝛿), the possibility of disutility from donating to a
charity, or subject confusion about the experiment design.

23 This  equivalence  is  essentially  ‘Lemma  1’.  The  reason  an  aspirational
investor avoids payoffs in significant excess of the aspiration in Lemma 1 is, at
its core, because doing so detracts from the probability of attaining it. In other
words, Lemma 1 asks the investor to cleverly use skewness to ‘‘maximize the
probability of attaining the aspiration’’.

15 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 10. Round 1 of section 2 in one of the treatments. Lottery ‘‘A’’ maximizes the probability of donation at the current donation threshold. As the donation threshold moves up
in the range of (12, 14] we should expect qualitative movements away from ‘‘A’’ and towards ‘‘B’’ and ‘‘C’’. As the donation threshold moves further up in the range of (14, 20] we
should expect further qualitative movements towards ‘‘C’’. The three treatments thus involve donation thresholds in the ranges of {(10, 12], (12, 14], (14, 20]}.

Table 4
The  percentages  across  columns  indicate  the  relative  frequency  of  choices  across
treatments.  The  ‘‘Low’’  [‘‘Mid’’/‘‘High’’]  treatment  includes  all  rounds  in  which  the
‘‘Donation threshold’’ was set such that lottery ‘‘A’’ [‘‘B’’/‘‘C’’] maximized the proba-
bility of the donation.
Chosen
Lottery
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
Total
N = 1008

Donation threshold
Low

18.45%
28.87%
52.68%

15.48%
48.51%
36.01%

24.11%
32.44%
43.45%

100%

100%

100%

High

Mid

336

336

336

while lottery ‘‘C’’ is always positively skewed. In addition, the donation
thresholds always fall in one of three regions: (1) where lottery ‘‘A’’
maximizes the probability of donation (we will refer to those regions as
the ‘‘Low’’ donation threshold region), (2) where lottery ‘‘B’’ maximizes
the  probability  of  donation  (‘‘Mid’’  donation  threshold  region)  and
(3) where lottery ‘‘C’’ maximizes the probability of donation (‘‘High’’
donation threshold region). As a reminder, higher donation thresholds
required more positively skewed lotteries to reach the thresholds while
lower donation thresholds that could be reached with several lotteries,
required more negatively skewed lotteries to maximize the probability
of reaching the threshold.

We find that, in accordance with our model’s predictions, on av-
erage, participants chose more positively skewed lotteries (𝑖.𝑒. demand
more positive skewness) when the donation threshold (aspiration point)
is  higher  and  more  negatively  skewed  lotteries  (𝑖.𝑒. demand  more
negative  skewness)  when  the  donation  threshold  is  lower. Table  4
shows  the  distribution  of  choices  across  rounds,  conditional  on  the
respective donation threshold regions, where all rounds were classified
into  donation  thresholds  falling  in  each  of  the  three  regions  across
treatments. If the possibility of achieving the donation made no impact
on participants, we would expect the three distributions ‘‘Low’’, ‘‘Mid’’,
‘‘High’’ not to be statistically different from each other, since the lottery
choices were identical. However, two-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests
of equality of distributions reject the hypothesis that any two of the
two distributions are equal. (The Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests of equality
were rejected at 𝑝-value = 0.002 for the distributions ‘‘Low’’ and ‘‘Mid’’;
at 𝑝-value < 0.001 for the distributions ‘‘Mid’’ and ‘‘High’’.) While the
negatively  skewed  lottery  (A)  is  generally  not  the  preferred  choice
(chosen less than 20% of the time), it is relatively more popular in the
‘‘Low’’ treatment where it maximizes the probability of attaining the
donation threshold. Similarly, lotteries B/C are relatively more popular
in  treatments  ‘‘Mid’’  /  ‘‘High’’  which  are  the  respective  treatments
where those lotteries maximize the probability of donation.

While Table 4 shows the average results across all rounds with 3 lot-
tery choices, the qualitative results hold across most rounds. Table 10
in the Appendix shows the breakdown of Table 4 for each of 8 rounds
involving 3 lottery choices. Out of the 24 comparisons (8 × 3), 18 are
qualitatively identical to the comparisons from Table 4, 𝑖.𝑒., each lottery
is chosen relatively more often when the donation threshold is where
that lottery maximizes the probability of donation. Qualitatively similar
are the results of binary lotteries with five choices (rounds 9 and 10)

16 

but less statistically conclusive due to smaller sample size and more
lotteries to choose from. These results can be found in Appendix.

Overall,  the  findings  in  Study  2  corroborate  and  reinforce  those
of Study 1 and are in line with our model’s prediction, namely that
decision makers will, other things being equal, seek skewness in order
to  increase  the  chance  of  achieving  their  aspiration.  Of  course,  as
expected, intrinsic risk and skewness preferences played an important
role and thus some participants chose lotteries that did not maximize
the probability of achieving the donation. On average, however, there
is a clear directional movement towards the lottery with the skewness
that maximizes the probability of donation.

7.2.3.  Robustness across different ‘‘sizes’’ of lotteries

As noted above, our experiment involved 126 subjects who earned,
on  average,  $20  each  (including  a  $  5  show-up  fee).  A  reasonable
concern in such experiments, in general, is whether the conclusions
drawn from modest stakes will hold even when the stakes are scaled
up.  While  we  are  not  able  to  provide  a  complete  answer  due  to
obvious resource constraints, we report trends using data from Study
2 that seem to offer some reassurance that our results are likely to be
scale-able to larger stakes.

We show this succinctly in Tables 5 and 6, which report the per-
centage of skewness choices that were made across all 10 rounds in
such a way that the choice maximized the subjects’ chances of attaining
the donation. In other words, we computed the percentage of choices
that conformed to the prediction of our model. The ‘benchmark’, on the
other hand, is the choice that would have been made if the subjects
did not factor in the presence of aspiration, 𝑖.𝑒. the randomizing choice
of  skewness.  The  second  columns  in Tables  5 and 6 report  the  raw
percentages of the aforementioned ‘‘predicted’’ choice (the ‘‘(donation)
maximizing choice’’). The third columns in Tables 5 and 6 report the
distance  from  the  hypothetical  ‘benchmark’, 𝑖.𝑒., the  distance  from
the choice of randomization (‘‘distance to benchmark’’). Note that the
decisions from three and five lottery choices were aggregated and the
probabilities for five lottery choices were re-calibrated to match those
of three-lottery choices.

Table  5 reports  these  numbers  across  different  subgroups  of  ex-
pected  lottery  payoffs  (subgroups  of  ‘‘means’’),  which  varied  in  the
range of $11  ∼  $22 in our experiment sessions. Within this range of
expected payoffs, the percentage of choice that conformed to our model
prediction  (𝑖.𝑒.,  the  percentage  of  (donation)  ‘‘Maximizing  Choice’’)
are maintained stably above the benchmark of randomization. More
importantly,  we  do  not  observe  any  systematic  pattern  across  the
subgroups of means, and the percentage of choices that conform to the
predictions of our model remain stably in the range of 34% ∼ 45%.24
Table 6 reports analogous results from a different exercise where the
‘size’ of lotteries are now measured by the standard deviation of lottery
payoffs (instead of mean). Here too, a similar pattern of stability is

24 If  anything,  we  observe  that  the  percentage  of  donation  maximizing
choice very slightly increases when the stakes are expanded (both in terms
of  the  lottery  mean  and  standard  deviation),  although  the  sample  size  is
small. This would imply that the subjects are (slightly) more responsive to
the aspiration as stakes grow, meaning that they align more tightly with the
prediction of our model when they confront lotteries with larger stakes.

A. Aristidou et al.

Table 5
‘‘Maximizing  Choice’’  indicates  the  proportion  of
choices  that  maximizes  the  probability  of  attaining
the donation. ‘‘Distance to Benchmark’’ indicates the
proportion of choices above the benchmark choice that
would have been made if the agents were random-
i.e. the  choice  of  skewness  made  heedless  of
izing,
the presence of aspirations. The numbers are reported
in  subgroups  of  expected  lottery  payoffs;  ‘‘mean’’.
N = 1260.
Mean

Maximizing
Choice

Distance to
Benchmark

11
13
15
17
18
19
22

0.44
0.34
0.39
0.42
0.44
0.41
0.45

+0.11
+0.01
+0.06
+0.09
+0.11
+0.08
+0.12

Table 6
This  table  reports  the  same  variables  in Table  5
over various subgroups of ‘‘standard deviation’’ in the
lotteries offered to subjects. N = 1260.
Standard
Deviation

Distance to
Benchmark

Maximizing
Choice

2
3
4
6
8

0.44
0.34
0.39
0.42
0.44

+0.11
+0.01
+0.06
+0.09
+0.11

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

donations. Our results imply that the presence of aspiration induces a
demand for skewness that were clearly in the direction predicted by
our ‘‘four seasons of gambling’’.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Andreas Aristidou: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Con-
ceptualization. Aleksandar Giga: Writing – review & editing, Writing
–  original  draft,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal  analysis,  Data
curation, Conceptualization. Suk Lee: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization. Fernando Zapatero: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Lemma 3

observed over subgroups of lotteries that varied in standard deviations
within the range of $2  ∼  $8. Thus, overall, the skewness-optimizing
behavior were observed to be stable over substantial variations in the
size  of  lottery  –  as  measured  by  the  mean  and  standard  deviations,
which varied from two- to four-fold. We cautiously anticipate that this
pattern would extrapolate to lotteries that are larger in scale.

Fix any 𝑅(> 1). Consider a collection of EU-maximization
Lemma 3.
problem (5), parameterized by 𝜉 = 𝐶0
̃𝐶 ∗
𝜉 denote the optimal
∈ (0, 1). Let
𝑅
consumption scheme used by the aspirational agent to solve (5) for a given
𝜉 within this collection of problems. Within this collection of problems, the
variance of ̃𝐶 ∗
𝜉 is highest on the EU-maximization problem whose 𝑝∗ equals
1
2

.

8.  Conclusions

In this paper, we investigate how social considerations can help us
understand investment behavior. In particular, we study the capacity
of  aspirational  utility  to  explain  behavioral  patterns  in  investment
decisions. We motivate and derive a version of aspirational utility by
noting that social interactions can often trigger a desire for the purchase
of non-divisible goods, such as status goods. The aspirational utility
that we arrive at is in the spirit of Friedman and Savage (1948), but
we extend our scope of analysis beyond the first two moments into
the third moment (skewness) and explore notable behavioral patterns
beyond  the  simultaneous  purchase  of  lotteries  and  bonds  —  which
was  the  motivation  of  their  paper.  Our  analysis  yields  a  rich  set  of
results  broadly  consistent  with  empirical  observations.  In  particular,
our model is able to deliver an explanation for the demand for skewness
in  both  directions,  and  makes  significant  progress  in  generating  the
disposition effect. Moreover, our aspirational utility features a convex
segment arising from a discontinuity (as in Diecidue and van de Ven
(2008)),  and  this  convexity  generates  patterns  of  stock-market  par-
ticipation  across  the  cross-section  of  wealth,  modulo  the  aspirations
by  class.  Our  aspirational  setup  has  a  natural,  tight  connection  to
existing  theories  on  investment  behaviors  that  focus  on  the  role  of
social  interactions.  As  such,  our  predictions  share  a  natural  overlap
with those of the ‘‘social utility’’ based theories. We support some of
our  theoretical  findings  with  a  lab  experiment.  We  chose  to  pursue
a  lab-based  experiment  because  aspirations  are  often  personal  and
unobserved, making a data-based empirical strategy challenging. We
conducted two complementary studies (Study 1 and Study 2) where
aspirations  were  potentially  induced  by  the  possibility  of  charitable

17 

Proof of Lemma 3. Let 𝑉 denote the variance of ̃𝐶 ∗
𝑉 can be written our explicitly as:

𝜉 . Using Lemma 1,

𝑉 =

𝑝∗
(1 − 𝑝∗)

(𝑅 − 𝐶0)2 = 𝑅2

𝑝∗
1 − 𝑝∗ (1 − 𝜉)2.

Differentiating, we get
) (
1
𝑅2

𝜕 𝑉
𝜕 𝜉

= 2

( 1 − 𝜉
1 − 𝑝∗
( 1 − 𝜉
1 − 𝑝∗

1
2
) ( 1
2

= 2

)

− 𝑝∗

𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝜉

1 − 𝜉
1 − 𝑝∗
− 𝑝∗)

,

,

=

1 − 𝑝∗
1 − 𝜉

where the second equality follows from
𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝜉
which can be easily verified by applying the implicit function theorem
on the first order condition for (5). Therefore,

𝜕 𝑉
𝜕 𝑝∗ =

𝜕 𝑉
𝜕 𝜉
𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝜉
2𝑅2

( 1−𝜉
1−𝑝∗

) ( 1

2

)

− 𝑝∗

=

= 2𝑅2

1−𝑝∗
1−𝜉
( 1 − 𝜉
1 − 𝑝∗

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
>0

)2

− 𝑝∗)

.

( 1
2

The Lemma then follows from observing that 𝜕 𝑉
ing in 𝑝∗ and that is has the unique root at 𝑝∗ = 1
2

.

𝜕 𝑝∗ is monotone decreas-

A. Aristidou et al.

Appendix B.  Proofs of Lemmas and Theorems

Proof  of Lemma  1.  (Step  1) Show  that  any  consumption  scheme
whose 𝐶𝑆 𝑒𝑥𝑐 𝑒𝑒𝑑 𝑠 𝑅 is dominated by a consumption scheme whose 𝐶𝑆
equals 𝑅.

Let 𝑁0 be the 𝑁 such that 𝐶𝑆 = 𝑅 on Eq. (7). (It can easily be shown
that) EU is continuously concave in 𝑁 on 𝑁 ≥ 𝑁0. It then suffices to
show that 𝜕 𝐸 𝑈
< 0,
𝜕 𝑁
then by continuous concavity of EU, 𝜕 𝐸 𝑈
< 0 for all 𝑁 ≥ 𝑁0, and
𝜕 𝑁
(again, by continuous concavity of EU) any consumption scheme with
𝑁 > 𝑁0 is dominated by a consumption scheme with 𝑁0

< 0 in the original problem. Namely, if 𝜕 𝐸 𝑈
𝜕 𝑁

|
|
|𝑁0

|
|
|𝑁0

|
|
|𝑁

< 0), first, write down

To prove this sufficient condition ( 𝜕 𝐸 𝑈
𝜕 𝑁
under Eqs. (6)–(8):
=(1 − 𝑝)𝑈 (𝐶𝐹 ) + 𝑝𝑈 (𝐶𝑆 )

the 𝐸 𝑈 |
|
|𝑁≥𝑁0
𝐸 𝑈 |
|
|𝑁≥𝑁0

|
|
|𝑁0

=(1 − 𝑝)𝑈 (𝐶0 − 𝑁) + 𝑝𝑈 (𝐶0 + 𝑁(𝑀 − 1))

=(1 − 𝑝)𝑈 (𝐶0 − 𝑁) + 𝑝𝑈 (𝐶0 + 𝑁

1 − 𝑝
𝑝

).

Then differentiate 𝐸 𝑈 |
|
|𝑁≥𝑁0

with respect to 𝑁 at 𝑁0, and any 𝑝 ∈

(−∞, 1):
𝜕 𝐸 𝑈
𝜕 𝑁

|
|
|𝑁0,𝑝

= −(1 − 𝑝)𝑈 ′(𝐶0 − 𝑁) + 𝑝

1 − 𝑝
𝑝

𝑈 ′(𝐶0 + 𝑁

1 − 𝑝
𝑝

)|
|
|𝑁0

= (1 − 𝑝)(𝑈 ′(𝐶𝑆 ) − 𝑈 ′(𝐶0 − 𝑁))|
|
|𝑁0
= (1 − 𝑝)(𝑈 ′(𝑅+) − 𝑈 ′( ̃𝐶𝐹 ))
< 0,

where the last inequality follows from the domain of 𝑝 ∈ (−∞, 1), and
Assumption (9).
𝐒𝐭 𝐞𝐩𝟐) Show that any consumption scheme whose 𝐶𝑆 𝑓 𝑎𝑙 𝑙 𝑠 𝑏𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑤 𝑅 is
dominated by a consumption scheme whose 𝐶𝑆 equals 𝑅.

When 𝐶𝑆 <  𝑅, 𝑈 (𝑐)  = 𝛿 𝑢(𝑐). Then by our standard assumptions
on 𝑢(𝑐) and Jensen’s inequality, we know that 𝑝 = 0 (no trade) domi-
nates all other consumption scheme, which is by definition, (weakly)
dominated by 𝑝∗ because 𝑝 = 0 is in the choice set. □

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

= −

Proof of part (𝑖): By Implicit Function Theorem, 𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝜉
Partial differentiation yields:
𝜕 𝐹
𝛿
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝑝)
𝜕 𝜉
and
𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝑝∗ = −

)−𝛾−1 (1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝜉)2

)−𝛾−1 (𝛾 − 1)(1 − 𝜉)

𝛿
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝑝)

𝜉 − 𝑝
1 − 𝑝

𝜉 − 𝑝
1 − 𝑝

𝑅1−𝛾 𝛾(

𝑅1−𝛾 𝛾(

1 − 𝑝

(1 − 𝑝)2

Hence,

𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝜉

=

1 − 𝑝∗
1 − 𝜉

> 0

=  −

𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝜉
𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝑝∗

holds.

(17)

Proof of part (𝑖𝑖) ∶ Recall that 𝑝∗ are quantities that depend on 𝜉, ceteris
paribus.  Hence,  for  any  sequence 𝜉𝑛 → 1,  there  is  a  corresponding
sequence 𝑝∗
𝑛; ⋅)
with 𝜉𝑛 → 1.

𝑛. Consequently, from (14), we can define a sequence 𝐹 (𝑝∗

The  proof  argues  by  contradiction.  Suppose (𝑖𝑖) does  not  hold,

𝑖.𝑒., ∃𝜉𝑛 ↑ 1 such that:

𝑝∗
𝑛

≠ 1.

lim
𝜉𝑛→1
From examining (14), we note that the expression

(18)

𝐹 (𝑝∗

𝑛; ⋅)

lim
𝜉𝑛→1
is well defined as long as (18) holds. On such a sequence 𝜉𝑛 → 1 where
(18) holds, the limit is computed (from (14)) as:

𝐹 (𝑝∗

𝑛; ⋅) = −

lim
𝜉𝑛→1

𝛿
1 − 𝛾

𝑅1−𝛾 +

𝑅1−𝛾 + 𝛿 − 1
1 − 𝛾

.

(19)

Since 𝐹 (𝑝∗; ⋅) = 0 (∵ first order condition), 𝐹 (𝑝∗
0’s that must invariably converge to 0. This implies:

𝑛; ⋅) is a sequence of

−

𝛿
1 − 𝛾

𝑅1−𝛾 +

𝑅1−𝛾 + 𝛿 − 1
1 − 𝛾

= 0.

(20)

Rearranging, this becomes: 𝑅1−𝛾 = 1, a contradiction under our assump-
tions 𝑅 > 1 and 𝛾 > 1.
Proof of part (𝑖𝑖𝑖): Let

Proof of Lemma 2. Since 𝑝 ∈ (0, 1), 𝐶𝐹 = 𝐶0−𝑝𝑅
1−𝑝
Also by Lemma 1, 𝐶𝑆 = R. Some calculations yield:
𝜎2 =

(𝑅 − 𝐶0)2,

𝑝
(1 − 𝑝)

and similarly,
E[(𝐶 − 𝐶0)3] =

𝑝(1 − 2𝑝)
(1 − 𝑝)2

(𝑅 − 𝐶0)3.

∴𝑆(𝑝) = 1−2𝑝
𝑝(1−𝑝)

√

and 𝑆′(𝑝) =

−1

2𝑝(1−𝑝)3∕2 < 0. □

, and 𝐶𝐹 −𝐶0 = 𝑝(𝐶0−𝑅)

(1−𝑝)

.

𝑔(𝜉) ∶ = 𝐹 (0; ⋅)

𝜉−𝛾 𝑅1−𝛾 (𝛾 − 1 − 𝜉 𝛾) +

𝑅1−𝛾 + 𝛿 − 1
1 − 𝛾

.

)∗ ∈ (0, 1) such that 𝑝∗ = 0 requires us to show that 𝑔(⋅)

(11)

(12)

=

𝛿
1 − 𝛾
Showing ∃( 𝐶0
𝑅
has a root in (0, 1). Note:
(𝑅1−𝛾 − 1) > 0
𝑔(1) =

1 − 𝛿
1 − 𝛾

Proof of Theorem 1. The optimization problem in (10) is specialized
to power utility:

(

max
𝑝

𝛿(1 − 𝑝)

𝐶 1−𝛾
𝐹 − 1
1 − 𝛾

+ 𝑝

𝑅1−𝛾 − 1
1 − 𝛾

)

, where 𝐶0 = 𝑝𝑅 + (1 − 𝑝)𝐶𝐹 .

Substitute in the expression for 𝐶𝐹 and let 𝜉 = 𝐶0
)−𝛾 𝑅1−𝛾 (
𝐹 (𝑝; ⋅) =

) +

(

𝛾 − 1 + 𝑝 − 𝜉 𝛾
1 − 𝑝

. The f.o.c. 𝜕 𝐸 𝑈
𝜕 𝑝
= 0

𝑅
𝑅1−𝛾 + 𝛿 − 1
1 − 𝛾

(13)

gives:

(14)

𝛿
1 − 𝛾

𝜉 − 𝑝
1 − 𝑝
Checking the s.o.c,
𝜕 𝐹 (𝑝; ⋅)
𝜕 𝑝

𝛿
1 − 𝛾

=

𝑅1−𝛾 (

)−𝛾−1 𝛾 2(1 − 𝜉)2
(1 − 𝑝)3
Hence, the EU-optimization problem amounts to finding the 𝑝∗ which
satisfies

𝜉 − 𝑝
1 − 𝑝

(15)

< 0

𝐹 (𝑝∗; ⋅) = 0

(16)

18 

Then, by Intermediate Value Theorem (IVT), it suffices to show that:
∃𝐶𝛿 ,𝑅 ∈ (0, 1), such that 𝑔(𝐶) < 0.
Proof of (21):

(21)

Rearranging 𝑔(𝜉), we get:

) +

𝑔(𝜉) = −𝛿 𝜉−𝛾 𝑅1−𝛾 (1 − 𝜉

𝛾
𝛾 − 1
However, 𝜉−𝛾 (1 − 𝜉 𝛾
) > 𝜉−𝛾 → ∞ as 𝜉 ↓ 0+. Plugging this back into
1−𝛾
(22), this implies 𝑔(𝜉) → −∞ as 𝜉 ↓ 0+. Hence, for any N∈ R, ∃𝐶 ∈ (0, 1)
such that 𝑔(𝐶) < −𝑁, which proves (21). □

𝑅1−𝛾 + 𝛿 − 1
1 − 𝛾

Proof of Theorem 2. Recall that
(i) 𝜕 𝐹 (𝑝;⋅)
𝜕 𝑝
(ii) 𝐶𝐹 − 𝐶0 = 𝑝∗

< 0 (from s.o.c.), and
1−𝑝∗ (𝐶0 − 𝑅).

Clearly, from (i), the Expected Utility is 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑 at 𝑝∗( ≤0). Note
that from (ii), choosing 𝑝∗=0 is equivalent to choosing 𝐶0, namely not
choosing any gamble. This is certainly an available option for the agent.
Hence, we want to show that the agent choosesp = 0 over p∈ (0, 1). To
do this, we need to show
𝐸 𝑈 (𝑝∗) ≥ 𝐸 𝑈 (0) > 𝐸 𝑈 (𝑝)

(22)

Proof of Theorem 4. Using Implicit Function Theorem, 𝜕 𝑝∗

𝜕 𝐶0 |𝛿 ,𝛾 ,𝜉 =

Under the current assumptions, 𝑅− 1 > 𝐶0 − 1 > 0, and 1 −𝛾 < 0, thus
> 1, and

< 0. To sign 𝐵, note that

) log 𝑅
𝐶0

)−1

𝐴 =

A. Aristidou et al.

where

𝑝∗ ≤ 0 < 𝑝

By Mean Value Theorem (MVT), ∃𝑐 ∈ (0, 𝑝) such that
𝐸 𝑈 (𝑝) − 𝐸 𝑈 (0) = 𝐸 𝑈 ′(𝑐)(𝑝 − 0) < 0.

(23)

(24)

This follows from the fact that 𝐸 𝑈 ′(𝑐) < 0, which can be shown by
applying MVT again. □

Proof of Theorem 3. Using Implicit Function Theorem, 𝑑 𝑝∗
𝑑 𝛿
Note that:
𝐹 (𝑝∗; ⋅) = 0 ⟺

= 0

𝜕 𝐸 𝑈
𝜕 𝑝

= −

𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝛿
𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝑝∗

.

𝜕(1 − 𝑝)𝛿

⟺

𝐶1−𝛾
𝐹 −1
1−𝛾
𝜕 𝑝
𝐶1−𝛾
𝐹 −1
1−𝛾

+ 𝑝 𝑅1−𝛾 −1
1−𝛾

= 0

+

𝑅1−𝛾 − 1
1 − 𝛾

= 0

𝜕(1 − 𝑝)
𝜕 𝑝

⟺ 𝛿

Hence,

𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝛿

=

𝐶1−𝛾
𝐹 −1
1−𝛾

𝜕(1 − 𝑝)
𝜕 𝑝
𝑅1−𝛾 − 1
1 − 𝛾

< 0.

= −

1
𝛿
Also, from before,
𝜕 𝐹
𝛿
𝜕 𝑝∗ = −
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝑝)
It thus follows that 𝑑 𝑝∗
𝑑 𝛿

(

. Note that:
= 𝛾 𝛿 𝑅−𝛾 (1 − 𝜉)
(1 − 𝑝)2

𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝐶0
−
𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝑝∗
𝜕 𝐹
𝜕 𝐶0
Also, from before,
𝜕 𝐹
𝛿
𝜕 𝑝∗ = −
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝑝)
It thus follows that 𝑑 𝑝∗

𝑅1−𝛾 𝛾(

𝜉 − 𝑝
1 − 𝑝

)−𝛾−1 (1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝜉)2

(1 − 𝑝)2

< 0

< 0. □

𝜉 − 𝑝
1 − 𝑝

)−𝛾−1 > 0.

𝑅1−𝛾 𝛾(

𝜉 − 𝑝
1 − 𝑝

)−𝛾−1 (1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝜉)2

(1 − 𝑝)2

< 0

𝑑 𝐶0 |𝛿 ,𝛾 ,𝜉 > 0. □

Proof of Theorem 5. A direct algebraic proof is not amenable. We first
suggest a sufficient condition (actually, an equivalence condition) and
then use this to prove the theorem.

Claim 1. For a given 𝛾 (and of course, under the fixed 𝐶0 and 𝛿 as assumed
in the statement of the theorem), let 𝑅∗
0(𝛾) denote the R which leads to
0(𝛾).) It suffices to show
𝑝∗ =  0. (Recall from Theorem 1, we know !∃𝑅∗

that

𝜕 𝑅∗
(𝛾)
0
𝜕 𝛾

< 0

Proof. Let 𝛾𝑖 < 𝛾𝑗 , and denote the optimal solutions pertaining to 𝛾𝑖
and 𝛾𝑗 (as functions of 𝜉) as 𝑝∗
𝛾 (𝜉) is well-
𝛾𝑖
defined as a function of 𝜉 because we have fixed 𝐶0. In fact, in this
setting we can treat 𝑝∗
𝛾 (𝜉) as a continuously differentiable function, as
a direct consequence of the Implicit Function Theorem. Note also that
(𝜉) can never intersect. To intersect at, say, point
by (17), 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑖

(𝜉). Note that 𝑝∗

(𝜉) and 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗

(𝜉) and 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗

(𝜉)

𝜕 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗
𝜕 𝜉

𝜉0, there must exist a neighborhood of 𝜉0 upon which |

| always
|. However, (17) prohibits this (i.e. plug in 𝜉0 into (17),
(𝜉) and vice
(𝜉) > 𝑝∗
| whenever 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗
𝛾𝑖
(𝜉) can never

exceeds |
𝜕 𝑝∗
(𝜉)
𝛾𝑖
and for any 𝜉 > 𝜉0, |
𝜕 𝜉
versa for 𝜉  < 𝜉0), asserting our claim that 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑖
intersect.

(𝜉) and 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗

𝜕 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗
𝜕 𝜉

| < |

(𝜉)

𝜕 𝑝∗
(𝜉)
𝛾𝑖
𝜕 𝜉

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

0(𝛾𝑗 ). Using what we know about 𝑝∗

< 0 holds.  Since 𝛾𝑖 <  𝛾𝑗 ,  this  implies
𝛾 (𝜉) from Theorem 1, we

𝜕 𝑅∗
(𝛾)
0
𝜕 𝛾

Next,  suppose  that
0(𝛾𝑖) > 𝑅∗
𝑅∗
can deduce that
𝐶0
0(𝛾𝑗 )

> 0 = 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗

𝑝∗
𝛾𝑖

𝑅∗

(

)

(

)

,

𝐶0
0(𝛾𝑗 )

𝑅∗

)

(

where  the  inequality  follows  from  combining Theorem  1-(i)  (𝑝∗ is
monotonically increasing in 𝜉 and approaches 1 from the left) and the
, by definition. Similarly, the equality follows
fact that 0 = 𝑝∗
𝑅∗
𝛾𝑖
0
from definition of 𝑅∗
(𝜉) and 𝑝∗
(𝜉)
𝛾𝑗
can  never  intersect,  this  inequality  at 𝜉 =
must  in  fact  hold
(𝜉) whenever 𝛾𝑖 < 𝛾𝑗 . Therefore,
uniformly in all 𝜉, namely, 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑖
𝑑 𝑝∗
< 0, as desired. □
𝑑 𝛾

𝐶0
(𝛾𝑖)
0(𝛾). But since we established that 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑖

(𝜉) > 𝑝∗
𝛾𝑗

𝐶0
(𝛾𝑗 )

𝑅∗
0

Claim 2.

𝜕 𝑅∗
(𝛾)
0
𝜕 𝛾

< 0.

Proof. We first specialize (14) by insisting 𝑝∗ = 0, as per the definition
of 𝑅∗
0:
𝐺(⋅) = 𝐹 (0; ⋅) = −𝛿 𝐶 −𝛾
0

𝐶 1−𝛾
0

= 0

𝑅 −

𝛾 +

𝑅1−𝛾 + 𝛿 − 1
1 − 𝛾

𝛿
1 − 𝛾
By Implicit Function Theorem,

𝜕 𝑅
𝜕 𝛾

= −

𝜕 𝐺
𝜕 𝛾
𝜕 𝐺
𝜕 𝑅

=

) − 1

( 𝑅
𝐶0
( 1−𝛾
𝐶0
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
𝐴<0

)

( 𝑅
𝐶0

)−𝛾 [

⋅

) log 𝑅
𝐶0

)−1

( 𝑅
𝐶0
( 𝑅
𝐶0
( 𝑅
𝐶0

] + ( 1
𝑅

) − 𝛿

)−𝛾 − 𝛿

(25)

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵 >0

> 0, a positive quantity that converges to

where ( 1
𝑅

) =

0 at the rate of 1
𝑅

.

(1−𝛿)𝐶𝛾−1

log 𝐶0

0
𝑅
𝐶0

−1

( 𝑅
𝐶0
1−𝛾
𝐶0

)−1

> 1 for all 𝑅
𝐶0

( 𝑅
𝐶0
( 𝑅
𝐶0
) < 𝛿, this implies ( 𝑅
𝐶0

) > 0, so if ( 𝑅
𝐶0

( 𝑅
𝐶0
( 1
( 𝑅
𝑅
𝐶0
and 𝐵 > 0. Therefore, under the given assumption, 𝜕 𝑅
𝜕 𝛾

] + ( 1
𝑅

)−𝛾 [

) log 𝑅
𝐶0

)−1

)−𝛾 < 𝛿,

< 0. □

Combining Claims 1 and 2, we arrive at the desired conclusion. □

Appendix C.  Further details on Section 4

Portfolio Simulation Methodology for the Disposition Effect: We
provide additional detail on the method we use to generate Table 2.
Single  stock  price  movements  are  simulated  with  a  (recombining)
𝑆 . On the final nodes,
binomial tree that match pre-specified 𝜇𝑆 and 𝜎2
aspirational  utility  realizations  are  computed  using  the  pre-specified
utility  parameters.  By  backward  induction,  we  compute  the  optimal
portfolio weights on all nodes of the binomial tree.

Using  the  above  results,  all  nodes  are  classified  into  one  of  the
four categories along the following criteria, as per Odean (1998): A
node represents a ‘Gain’ (‘Loss’) if the stock price at the node is higher
(lower)  than  the  average  stock  price  purchased  up  to  that  node.  A
node represents a ‘Realized’ (‘Paper’) gain/loss if the holdings of the
stock was reduced (not reduced) at that node. This allows all nodes to
be classified into one of the four categories (1) paper gain (2) paper
loss (3) realized gain (4) realized loss. Then, the Proportion of Gains
Realized (PGR) is computed as:

𝑃 𝐺 𝑅 =

realized gain
realized gain + paper gain

,

and the Proportion of Loss Realized (PLR) is computed as:

𝑃 𝐺 𝑅 =

realized loss
realized loss + paper loss

.

For a full detail of the method, see Barberis and Xiong (2009) or Odean
(1998).

19 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 11. Dynamic portfolio optimization with 3 sub-periods. Parameters are identical to those in Fig. 5, in particular, the aspiration level is at 𝑅 = 65 k. The green dots denote
nodes that display the disposition effect. The red dots denote nodes that do not display the disposition effect. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend,
the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 7
Revealed preferences for skewness when we break down by the four distinct skewness
combinations that our experiment involved. Note that in all pairs the mean and variance
is the same across the two options.
Revealed

Pairs with skewness of
{0, +1.5}

{0, +2.7}

{0, −1.5}

{0, −2.7}

preference

AA
AB
BA
BB

30.16%
21.83%
12.30%
35.71%

100%

25.93%
23.81%
17.46%
32.80%

100%

45.24%
17.06%
13.49%
24.21%

100%

39.42%
19.31%
11.11%
30.16%

100%

Dynamic Optimization and the Disposition Effect: In Fig. 11 below,
we provide additional explanation on how dynamic optimization leads
to results as seen on Table 2. The underlying parameters are identical
to those in Fig. 5. The vertical location of the nodes denote the (sub)-
period,  the  horizontal  location  of  the  nodes  denote  the  size  of  the
portfolio. The colored interim nodes (𝑇 = 1, 𝑇 = 2) denote nodes where
the  investor realizes –that  is, reduces 𝑤𝑆 –  the  (interim)  investment
outcomes. Those colored in green (red) are those that conform (do not
conform) to the notion of the disposition effect: nodes where stocks
are realized – i.e., sold off – following a gain (loss) in stock price. For
example, in the first sub-period (𝑇 =  1), the node with 𝑤𝑆 =  46%
represents a realization of stock investment outcome (𝑤𝑆 =  55% →
𝑤𝑆 =  46%)  following  a  gain,  hence  marked  in  green.  The  intuition
for  this  realization  is  that  –  conditional  on  the  gain  in  stock  price
– agents can afford, and is willing to reduce the exposure to stocks,
since the gap between the portfolio value and the aspiration has been
reduced due to the gain in stock price: In other words, the aspiration is
now more accessible, and too much volatility may undo the gain that
they have made. The actions described thus far are in line with the
disposition effect. However, in the second sub-period (𝑇 = 2), the node
with 𝑤𝑆 = 16% represents a realization of stock investment outcome
(𝑤𝑆 =  63% → 𝑤𝑆 =  16%) following a loss. Here, the reduction of
𝑤𝑆 owes to the fact that the agent’s aspiration – after two consecutive
drops  in  stock  prices  –  has  turned  unattainable,  and  the  agent  has
effectively ‘‘given up’’, and reduces stock holdings to the default, CRRA
level. This does not conform to the disposition effect, and is marked in
red. Roughly speaking, that there are more green nodes than red nodes
translates to 𝑃 𝐺 𝑅
> 1, the measure used by Odean (1998) to document
𝑃 𝐿𝑅

20 

the disposition effect. The actions seen here are quite typical for the
range 𝑅 ∈ (55𝑘, 70𝑘), even more so as we increase 𝑇 to 4 and 5 (where
we hit a computational barrier).
Dynamic Optimization Process Outside of the ‘‘Goldilocks’’ Zone:
We describe the optimization process when 𝑅 is either too far, or too
close. Fig. 12 below describes the situation where the aspiration is ‘‘too
far’’ (𝐶0 = 50 k, R = 80 k). Here, a single drop in stock price is enough
to render the aspiration unreachable, hence agents realize their losses
(‘‘give up’’) as soon as they observe a drop in stock price. As such, there
are more ‘‘red nodes’’ than ‘‘green nodes’’ and the aspirational utility
fails to generate the disposition effect. As for the other extreme, Fig. 13
below describes a situation where the aspiration is ‘‘too close’’ (𝐶0 =
50 k, R = 50 k). Here, the aspiration is attainable simply by burying
most of their wealth in the risk-free assets: low 𝑤𝑆 (𝑤𝑆 = 9%). Upon a
gain in stock, they revert back to the CRRA utility investment scheme
(𝑤𝑆 ≈ 16%), as they are already a safe distance from 𝑅. This translates
to increasing their stock exposure following a gain in stock price; again,
the opposite of the disposition effect.
Connection with the Dynamic Generation of Skewness in Barberis
(2012): Our model, as it was set up in Section 2 (single period model),
suppresses the role of dynamics, and generates skewness ‘‘statically’’.
However, the analysis in Section 4 reassures us that it can be extended
to incorporate the core insight of Barberis (2012): that skewed payoffs
can be generated dynamically, – even as a continuation of relatively
symmetric bets – for example, by committing to exit the gambling scene
whenever  the  cumulative  loss  exceeds  a  certain  threshold  (thereby,
in  this  case,  generating  positive  skewness).  To  see  that  our  setup  is
amenable to such dynamically generated skewness, it is useful to com-
pare Fig. 12 against Fig. 13. The payoffs, while generated by symmetric
bets (stock movements) are clearly skewed: positively skewed in Fig. 12
and (essentially) negatively skewed in Fig. 13. Moreover, the optimality
of the dynamically generated skewness also conforms to the predictions
of Theorem 1 – namely, positive skewness is optimal when aspiration
is far, and vice versa – indicating that Theorem 1 could likely be easily
extended  into  a  setup  where  skewness  is  generated  dynamically,  as
opposed to statically in our current setup.

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Fig. 12. Aspiration is ‘‘too far’’. This figure is drawn under an identical setup as in Fig. 11 except for an aspiration that is set to be at 𝑅 = 80 k (> 65 k). (For interpretation of
the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 13. Aspiration is ‘‘too close’’. This figure is drawn under an identical setup as in Fig. 11 except for an aspiration that is set to be at 𝑅 = 50 k (< 65 k).

Revealed

Table 8
Further breaking down lottery pairs for all the pairs where the skewed option was positively skewed. The third row shows
the mean and standard deviation of the lottery pair.
Pairs with
{0, +1.5}
(7, 2)
28.57%
20.63%
14.29%
36.51%

{0, +2.7}
(11, 3)
26.19%
28.57%
19.05%
26.19%

(17, 3)
21.43%
23.81%
19.84%
34.92%

(13, 3)
30.16%
19.05%
13.49%
37.30%

(19, 8)
31.75%
23.02%
10.32%
34.92%

AA
AB
BA
BB

preference

Skewness:

(𝜇, 𝜎):

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

21 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Table 9
All the pairs where the skewed option was negatively skewed.

Revealed

preference

Skewness:

(𝜇, 𝜎):

AA
AB
BA
BB

Pairs with
{0, −1.5}
(7, 2)
43.65%
19.84%
15.08%
21.43%

100%

(19, 8)
46.83%
14.29%
11.90%
26.98%

100%

{0, −2.7}
(11, 3)
41.27%
23.81%
6.35%
30.95%

100%

(13, 3)
34.13%
13.49%
21.43%
30.95%

100%

(17, 3)
42.86%
20.63
5.56%
30.95%

100%

Table 10
The percentages across columns indicate the histogram of choices across treatments. The ‘‘Low’’ [‘‘Mid’’/‘‘High’’] treatment
includes all rounds in which the ‘‘Donation threshold’’ was set such that lottery ‘‘A’’ [‘‘B’’/‘‘C’’] maximized the probability of
the donation. Bolded percentages indicate the largest percentage of the row.
Round

N

Donation threshold
Low

Chosen
Lottery
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)
A (−ve skewness)
B (0 skewness)
C (+ve skewness)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Mid

14.29%
57.14%
28.57%

19.05%
54.76%
26.19%

9.52%
57.14%
33.33%

14.29%
40.48%
45.27%

16.67%
38.10%
45.24%

16.67%
45.24%
38.10%

11.90%
52.38%
35.71%

21.43%
42.86%
35.71%

High

16.67%
33.33%
50.00%

26.19%
33.33%
40.48%

14.29%
35.71%
50.00%

16.67%
35.71%
47.62%

14.29%
21.43%
64.29%

16.67%
26.19%
57.14%

28.57%
21.43%
50.00%

14.29%
23.81%
61.90%

126

126

126

126

126

126

126

126

Table 11
The percentages across columns indicate the histogram of choices
across  treatments.  The  highlighted  cells  indicate  the  donation
probability maximizing choice for each region (‘‘Low’’, ‘‘Mid’’, and
‘‘High’’) Note that for ‘‘High’’, Choice D maximized the donation
probability in Question 9, and Choice E maximized the donation
probability in Question 10.
Chosen

Donation threshold
Mid

Low

High

Lottery
A (highly -ve skewness)
B (mildly -ve skewness)
C (0 skewness)
D (mildly +ve skewness)
E (highly +ve skewness)
Total
N = 252

10.71%
8.33%
17.86%
20.24%
42.86%

7.14%
10.71%
36.90%
10.71%
34.52%

10.71%
8.33%
20.24%
29.76%
30.95%

100%

100%

100%

84

84

84

Appendix D.  Further details on Section 7

Lotteries used in Study 1 (Sections 1 & 3):

Option Mean

SD Skewness Outcomes

Round
1 (5*)
A
1 (5*)
B
2* (7)
A
2* (7)
B
3 (2*)
A
3 (2*)
B
4 (9*)
A
4 (9*)
B
5* (1)
A
5* (1)
B
6* (10) A
6* (10)
B
7* (4)
A
7* (4)
B
8* (3)
A
8* (3)
B
9 (6*)
A
9 (6*)
B
10 (8*) A
10 (8*)
B

7
7
13
13
11
11
11
11
7
7
19
19
13
13
19
19
17
17
17
17

2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
8
8
3
3
8
8
3
3
3
3

0
1.5
0
−2.7
0
−2.7
0
2.7
0
−1.5
0
1.5
0
2.7
0
−1.5
0
2.7
0
−2.7

{5, 9}
{6, 11}
{10, 16}
{4, 14}
{8, 14}
{2, 12}
{8, 14}
{10, 20}
{5, 9}
{3, 8}
{11, 27}
{15, 35}
{10, 16}
{12, 22}
{11, 27}
{3, 23}
{14, 20}
{16, 26}
{14, 20}
{8, 18}

Pr.
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.1, 0.9)

26.19%
33.33%
40.48%

7.14%
42.86%
50.00%

9.52%
30.95%
59.52%

38.10%
21.43%
40.48%

28.57%
30.95%
40.48%

35.71%
45.24%
19.05%

11.90%
28.57%
59.52%

35.71%
26.19%
38.10%

22 

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Notes:
(a) The rounds in brackets indicate the corresponding round in the
experiment section 3. The non-bracketed number indicates the round
in section 1.

(b) The starred rounds indicate which section involved the control

pair (i.e. when the donation threshold was impossible to reach).

(c)  Option  A  was  always  the  non-skewed  option,  Option  B  was

always the skewed option.

(d) Participants did not see the moments of the lotteries.

Lotteries used in Study 2 (section 2):

Round Option Mean

SD Skewness Outcomes

1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
7
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
10
10
10
10
10

A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E

11
11
11
13
13
13
15
15
15
17
17
17
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
19
19
19
19
19
22
22
22
22
22

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
4
4
4
6
6
6
8
8
8
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6

−2.7
0
2.7
−2.7
0
2.7
−2.7
0
2.7
−2.7
0
2.7
−1.5
0
1.5
−1.5
0
1.5
−1.5
0
1.5
−1.5
0
1.5
−2.7
−1.5
0
1.5
2.7
−2.7
−1.5
0
1.5
2.7

{2, 12}
{8, 14}
{10, 20}
{4, 14}
{10, 16}
{12, 22}
{6, 16}
{12, 18}
{14, 24}
{8, 18}
{14, 20}
{16, 26}
{14, 19}
{16, 20}
{17, 22}
{10, 20}
{14, 22}
{16, 26}
{6, 21}
{12, 24}
{15, 30}
{2, 22}
{10, 26}
{14, 34}
{1, 21}
{7, 22}
{13, 25}
{16, 31}
{17, 37}
{4, 24}
{10, 25}
{16, 28}
{16, 31}
{17, 37}

Pr.
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.9, 0.1)
(0.1, 0.9)
(0.2, 0.8)
(0.5, 0.5)
(0.8, 0.2)
(0.9, 0.1)

Charity organization options used in the experiment:

1. MAKE-A-WISH Foundation

The  MAKE-A-WISH  is  a  non-profit  organization  that  creates  life-
changing wishes for children with a critical illness who are between
the ages of 2.5 and 18. Children who may be eligible to receive a wish
can be referred by either a medical professional treating the child, a
parent/guardian or the potential wish child.

2. AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (ACLU)

The  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  (ACLU)  works  in  the  courts,
legislatures  and  communities  to  defend  and  preserve  the  individual
rights  and  liberties  guaranteed  to  all  people  in  this  country  by  the
Constitution and laws of the United States.

23 

3. AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

Amnesty international is a global movement of more than 7 million
people  in  over  150  countries  and  territories  who  campaign  to  end
abuses of human rights.

4. World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)

The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) is an international non-
governmental organization founded in 1961, working in the field of
the wilderness preservation, and the reduction of human impact on the
environment.

5. GREENPEACE

Greenpeace  is  an  independent,  campaigning  organization  which
uses non-violent, creative confrontation to expose global environmental
problems, and to force solutions for a green and peaceful future.

6. The Salvation Army

The Salvation Army, an international movement, is an evangelical
part of the universal Christian Church. Its message is based on the Bible.
Its ministry is motivated by the love of God. Its mission is to preach the
gospel of Jesus Christ and to meet human needs in His name without
discrimination.

Additional Tables for Section 7 - Study 1

See Tables 7–9.

Additional Tables for Section 7 - Study 2

See Tables 10 and 11.

References

Albuquerque, R., 2012. Skewness in stock returns: Reconciling the evidence on firm

versus aggregate returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (5), 1630–1673.

Andreoni, J., 1989. Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity and Ricardian

equivalence. J. Polit. Econ. 97 (6), 1447–1458.

Andreoni,  J.,  1990.  Impure  altruism  and  donations  to  public  goods:  A  theory  of

warm-glow giving. Econ. J. 100 (401), 464–477.

Artavanis, N., Morse, A., Tsoutsoura, M., 2016. Measuring income tax evasion using

bank credit: Evidence from Greece. Q. J. Econ. 131 (2), 739–798.

Bali, T.G., Cakici, N., Whitelaw, R.F., 2011. Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the

cross-section of expected returns. J. Financ. Econ. 99 (2), 427–446.

Bali, T.G., Gunaydin, A.D., Jansson, T., Karabulut, Y., 2023. Do the rich gamble in the
stock market? Low risk anomalies and wealthy households. J. Financ. Econ. 150
(2), 103715.

Barberis, N., 2012. A model of casino gambling. Manage. Sci. 58 (1), 35–51.
Barberis,  N.,  Huang,  M.,  2008.  Stocks  as  lotteries:  The  implications  of  probability

weighting for security prices. Amer. Econ. Rev. 98 (5), 2066–2100.

Barberis, N., Xiong, W., 2009. What drives the disposition effect? An analysis of a

long-standing preference-based explanation. J. Finance 64 (2), 751–784.

Barberis, N., Xiong, W., 2012. Realization utility. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (2), 251–271,

Special Issue on Investor Sentiment.

Becker, G.S., 1974. A theory of social interactions. J. Polit. Econ. 82 (6), 1063–1093.
Becker, G., Murphy, K.M., Werning, I., 2005. The equilibrium distribution of income

and the market for status. J. Polit. Econ. 113 (2), 282–310.

Boyer, B., Mitton, T., Vorkink, K., 2010. Expected idiosyncratic skewness. Rev. Financ.

Stud. 23 (1), 169–202.

Boyer, B.H., Vorkink, K., 2014. Stock options as lotteries. J. Finance 69 (4), 1485–1527.
Brunnermeier, M., Parker, J., Gollier, C., 2007. Optimal beliefs, asset prices, and the

preference for skewed returns. Amer. Econ. Rev. 97 (2), 159–165.
Campbell, J., 2006. Household finance. J. Finance 61 (4), 1553–1604.
Campbell,  J.Y.,  Cochrane,  J.H.,  1999.  By  force  of  habit:  A  consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 107 (2), 205–251.
Charles, K.K., Hurst, E., Roussanov, N., 2009. Conspicuous consumption and race. Q.

Chen,  A.,  Lee,  S.,  Zapatero,  F.,  2024.  Clinging  onto  the  cliff:  a  model  of  financial

J. Econ. 124 (2), 425–467.

misconduct. Working paper.

Clotfelter, C.T., 2000. Do lotteries hurt the poor? Well, yes and no. A Summary of
Testimony Given to the House Select Committee on a State Lottery (April 28).
Clotfelter, C., Cook, P., 1991. Selling hope: State lotteries in America. In: National

Bureau of Economic Research book, Harvard University Press.

Conrad,  J.,  Dittmar,  R.F.,  Ghysels,  E.,  2013.  Ex  ante  skewness  and  expected  stock

returns. J. Finance 68 (1), 85–124.

Constantinides, G., 1983. Capital market equilibrium with personal tax. Econometrica

51 (3), 611–636.

A. Aristidou et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103970 

Constantinides, G., 1984. Optimal stock trading with personal taxes: Implications for

prices and the abnormal January returns. J. Financ. Econ. 13 (1), 65–89.

Constantinides, G., 1990. Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle.

J. Polit. Econ. 98 (3), 519–543.

Cordier, J., Gross, M., 2014. The complete guide to option selling: How selling options
can lead to stellar returns in bull and bear markets, third ed. McGraw-Hill.
Diecidue, E., van de Ven, J., 2008. Aspiration level, probability of success and failure,

and expected utility. Internat. Econom. Rev. 49 (2), 683–700.

Kumar, A., 2009. Who gambles in the stock market? J. Finance 64 (4), 1889–1933.
Levy, H., 1969. A utility function depending on the first three moments. J. Finance 24

(4), 715–719.

Lopes, L.L., 1987. Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. In: Berkowitz, L.
(Ed.),  Advances  in  Experimental  Social  Psychology,  Vol.  20.  vol.  20,  Academic
Press, pp. 255–295.

McKay, A., Wieland, J.F., 2021. Lumpy durable consumption demand and the limited

ammunition of monetary policy. Econometrica 89 (6), 2717–2749.

Ebert,  S.,  Strack,  P.,  2015.  Until  the  bitter  end:  On  prospect  theory  in  a  dynamic

Menezes, C., Geiss, C., Tressler, J., 1980. Increasing downside risk. Amer. Econ. Rev.

context. Amer. Econ. Rev. 105 (4), 1618–1633.

70 (5), 921–932.

Friedman, M., Savage, L.J., 1948. The utility analysis of choices involving risk. J. Polit.

Mitton, T., Vorkink, K., 2007. Equilibrium underdiversification and the preference for

Han,  B.,  Hirshleifer,  D.,  Walden,  J.,  2022.  Social  transmission  bias  and  investor

Pew Research Center, 2024. Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our

Harvey, C., Siddique, A., 2000. Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. J. Finance

Rayo, L., Becker, G., 2007. Evolutionary efficiency and happiness. J. Polit. Econ. 115

1775–1798.

income calculator.

(2), 302–337.

Genicot, G., Ray, D., 2017. Aspirations and inequality. Econometrica 85, 489–519.
Glazer, A., Konrad, K., 1996. A signaling explanation for charity. Amer. Econ. Rev. 86

Goetzmann, W., Kumar, A., 2008. Equity portfolio diversification. Rev. Finance 12 (3),

Econ. 56 (4).

(4), 1019–1028.

433–463.

Green,  T.C.,  Hwang,  B.-H.,  2012.  Initial  public  offerings  as  lotteries:  Skewness

preference and first-day returns. Manage. Sci. 58 (2), 432–444.

behavior. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 57 (1), 390–412.

55 (3), 1263–1295.

Heffetz,  O.,  Frank,  R.H.,  2011.  Chapter  3  -  preferences  for  status:  Evidence  and
economic implications. In: Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., Jackson, M.O. (Eds.), Handbook
of Social Economics, Vol. 1. North-Holland, pp. 69–91.

Heimer, R.Z., 2016. Peer pressure: Social interaction and the disposition effect. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 29 (11), 3177–3209.

Heimer, R., Iliewa, Z., Imas, A., Weber, M., 2023. Dynamic Inconsistency in Risky
Choice: Evidence from the Lab and Field. NBER Working Papers 30910, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Heimer, R., Simon, D., 2015. Facebook Finance: How Social Interaction Propagates
Active  Investing.  Working  Papers  (Old  Series)  1522,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of
Cleveland.

Henderson,  V.,  Hobson,  D.,  2013.  Risk  aversion,  indivisible  timing  options,  and

gambling. Oper. Res. 61 (1), 126–137.

skewness. Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (4), 1255–1288.

Ng, Y.-K., 1965. Why do people buy lottery tickets? Choices involving risk and the

indivisibility of expenditure. J. Polit. Econ. 73 (5).

Ntoumanis, N., Ng, J.Y.Y., Barkoukis, V., Backhouse, S., 2014. Personal and psychoso-
cial predictors of doping use in physical activity settings: a meta-analysis. Sports
Med. 44 (11), 1603–1624.

Odean, T., 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? J. Finance 53 (5),

Ring, C., Kavussanu, M., 2018. The impact of achievement goals on cheating in sport.

Psychol. Sport Exerc. 35, 98–103.

Roussanov,  N.,  2010.  Diversification  and  its  discontents:  Idiosyncratic  and  en-
trepreneurial risk in the quest for social status. J. Finance 65 (5), 1755–1788.
Rubenstein, R., Scafidi, B., 2002. Who pays and who benefits? Examining the distri-
butional consequences of the Georgia lottery for education. Natl. Tax J. 55 (2),
223–238.

Shefrin, H., Statman, M., 1985. The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers

too long: Theory and evidence. J. Finance 40 (3), 777–790.

Shefrin, H., Statman, M., 2000. Behavioral portfolio theory. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 35

(2), 127–151.

Slemrod, J., 2019. Tax compliance and enforcement. J. Econ. Lit. 57 (4), 904–954.
Soltes,  E.,  2016.  Why  They  Do  It:  Inside  the  Mind  of  the  White-Collar  Criminal.

Sundaresan, S.M., 1989. Intertemporally dependent preferences and the volatility of

Taleb, N.N., 2007. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. Random

House, New York.

Tversky,  A.,  Kahneman,  D.,  1992.  Advances  in  prospect  theory:  Cumulative

representation of uncertainty. J. Risk Uncertain. 5 (4), 297–323.

Zhang, X.-J., 2013. Book-to-market ratio and skewness of stock returns. Account. Rev.

Hirshleifer, D., 2015. Behavioral finance. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ. 7 (Volume 7, 2015),

PublicAffairs, New York.

133–159.

Hong,  H.,  Kubik,  J.D.,  Stein,  J.C.,  2004.  Social  interaction  and  stock-market

consumption and wealth. Rev. Financ. Stud. 2 (1), 73–89.

participation. J. Finance 59 (1), 137–163.

Iyer, R., Popescu, A., 2023. New Evidence on Spillovers Between Crypto Assets and
Financial Markets, Vol. 2023, No. 213. International Monetary Fund, USA.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.

Kimball, M., 1990. Precautionary saving in the small and in the large. Econometrica

88 (6), 2213–2240.

Econometrica 47 (2), 263–291.

58 (1), 53–73.

Kraus,  A.,  Litzenberger,  R.H.,  1976.  Skewness  preference  and  the  valuation  of  risk

assets. J. Finance 31 (4), 1085–1100.

24 

