Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Gig labor: Trading safety nets for steering wheels✩
Vyacheslav Fos a,b, Naser Hamdi c, Ankit Kalda d, Jordan Nickerson e,∗
a Boston College, Carroll School of Management, United States of America
b Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI), United States of America
c Equifax Inc, United States of America
d Indiana University, Kelley School of Business, United States of America
e University of Washington, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Using administrative data on credit profiles matched with unemployment insurance (UI) for individuals in
the U.S., we show that laid-off workers with access to Uber rely less on household debt, experience fewer
delinquencies, and are less likely to apply for UI benefits. Our empirical strategy exploits both the staggered
market entry of Uber across cities and the differential benefit of its entry across car owners based on car age,
a key eligibility requirement of the platform. We conclude that the introduction of Uber reduced reliance on
these alternative means of smoothing extreme income shocks.

Dataset link: Replication Code for’ Gig Labor: T
rading Safety Nets for Steering Wheels’ (Origin
al data)

Keywords:
Gig-economy
Labor markets
Household debt
Credit delinquencies
Unemployment insurance

1.  Introduction

The provision of consumer credit facilitates a household’s ability to
smooth consumption, as one would expect under a traditional life-cycle
framework (Keynes, 1936; Modigliani and Brumberg, 1954; Friedman,
1957; Hall, 1978). This role of credit access is well supported in the lit-
erature, which finds evidence of consumption smoothing through credit
utilization  in  both  normal  times  (Baugh  and  Correia, 2022; Cocco,
2013),  as  well  as  times  of  income  uncertainty  or  financial  distress
(Chen et al., 2020; Morse, 2011). As such, increased credit utilization
offers a natural means by which a household can attempt to weather
negative income shocks, like an unemployment spell (Diamond, 1990;
Herkenhoff  et  al., 2016; Braxton  et  al., 2020; Sullivan, 2008).  The
expected welfare gains achieved through such intertemporal risk shar-
ing also act as motivation for government policy, such as the broad
deployment of unemployment insurance.

Yet, an increased reliance on credit may be less than desirable from
the viewpoint of economic efficiency. First, an increase in household
leverage may serve to amplify negative economic shocks during down-
turns, possibly through the limited liability nature of credit contracts, as
evidenced in the financial crisis (Mian and Sufi, 2011; Mian et al., 2013;
Mian and Sufi, 2014). Second, increased debt burdens may dampen a
household’s incentives to supply labor through a debt overhang chan-
nel (Bernstein, 2021; Donaldson et al., 2019). Likewise, the presence
of  a  social  safety  net  may  similarly  distort  an  individual’s  incentive
to seek reemployment (Baily, 1978; Flemming, 1978; Ljungqvist and
Sargent, 1998). Thus, while consumer credit access and unemployment
insurance  provide  a  means  of  weathering  unemployment  shocks,  it
is not clear to what extent a household would rely on such tools if
an alternative option was available that allowed a newly unemployed
individual to more readily be rematched in the labor market.

✩
We thank Dimitris Papanikolaou (the editor) for thoughtful guidance throughout the process. This paper represents the views of the authors only and not
those of Equifax Inc. in accordance with any and all applicable laws, limitations and protections as required by the company. We are deeply grateful to Equifax
Inc. for supporting this research and allowing access to their data. We have benefited from discussions with Steffen Andersen, John Barrios, Philip Bond, Marco
Di Maggio, Xavier Giroud, John Graham, Isaac Hacamo, Dmitri Koustas, David Matsa, Michaela Pagel, Kim Peijnenburg, Paul Oyer, Antoinette Schoar, Amit
Seru, Phil Strahan, Margarita Tsoutsoura, and seminar/conference participants at NBER Household Finance Summer Institute, CEPR European Conference on
Household Finance, Financial Research Association Conference, Labor and Finance Conference (Chicago), RCFS/RAPS Conference, Western Finance Association
Conference, American Finance Association Conference, Boston College, Copenhagen Business School, Emory University, Georgetown University, Indiana University,
Pennsylvania State University, Michigan State University, USI Lugano, Darden School of Business, USC, University of Pittsburgh, University of Utah and University
of Washington.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

fos@bc.edu (V. Fos), nhamdi@gmail.com (N. Hamdi), akalda@iu.edu (A. Kalda), jnick@uw.edu (J. Nickerson).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103956
Received 7 June 2022; Received in revised form 9 October 2024; Accepted 10 October 2024
Available online 7 November 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

V. Fos et al.

In  this  paper,  we  examine  whether  the  introduction  of  the  gig
economy serves as a substitute for these other responses to job loss.
Using a comprehensive set of Uber product launch dates and employee-
level data on job separations, we show that laid-off workers with access
to  Uber  are  less  likely  to  rely  on  untapped  credit.  Following  Uber’s
entry into a market, workers with access to the ride-sharing platform
experience a relative decrease in total outstanding balances of $689, or
0.9% of the average individual’s debt burden. Importantly, the effects
of the ride-sharing platform extend to credit performance, with workers
experiencing a relative decrease in delinquencies of 4.9%. To the extent
that credit delinquencies are associated with negative welfare implica-
tions, this result is consistent with a transition towards gig-based labor
supply that allows some laid-off workers to avoid costs associated with
job loss. These findings are consistent with a similar potential benefit
of the gig-economy on entrepreneurship (Barrios et al., 2020), which
might alternatively be achieved through credit utilization (Herkenhoff
et al., 2021). We find a similar substitution away from unemployment
insurance (UI), where workers with access to the ride-sharing platform
are 3.3% less likely to receive UI benefits.

To identify these effects, we first leverage disaggregated employ-
ment data to identify the set of job separations outside of a worker’s
control (a layoff). Our empirical strategy is based on a triple diff-in-
diff approach where the first difference captures the post-layoff change
in  the  outcome,  and  the  second  difference  captures  how  the  post-
layoff difference changes following Uber’s entry into an area. The final
difference captures the differential effect of Uber’s entry following job
loss based on a worker’s car age, which determines whether a car meets
Uber-specified eligibility requirements. As such, this final dimension
reflects heterogeneity in individuals’ ability to readily participate on
the ride-sharing platform to earn income following a job separation.
The high frequency, granular nature of the data allow us to strip out
any location-specific economic trends with high-density fixed effects.
For  the  evidence  to  have  a  causal  interpretation,  our  empirical
strategy requires the following identifying assumption: the timing of
Uber’s  entry  into  a  market  is  orthogonal  to  omitted  variables  that
(1)  differentially  affect  the  outcome  of  interest  for  an  eligible  car
owner relative to a noneligible car owner, and (2) that the resulting
difference is not present during employment but instead materializes
post-separation. That is, in the absence of Uber’s entry, the difference
in outcome variables around layoffs for eligible car owners and non-
eligible  car  owners  would  be  the  same  for  areas  with  and  without
Uber.

We  present  several  pieces  of  evidence  to  support  our  identifying
assumption. We find no evidence of a change in the composition of
laid-off workers around the time ride-sharing enters a market. We also
find no evidence of an effect leading up to Uber’s entry into a market.
Moreover, when decomposing effects across car age, we find a stable
effect of Uber’s entry across the range of eligible car ages in conjunction
with a marked jump at the threshold determining car eligibility, which
suggests  we  are  not  picking  up  a  broader  heterogeneous  effect  that
varies by wealth. Taken together, these results suggest our findings are
not being driven by an omitted variable that is correlated with Uber’s
entry.  Finally,  we  demonstrate  the  robustness  of  our  effects  to  the
stacked regression approach of Gormley and Matsa (2011), assuaging
recent concerns of estimating difference-in-differences in a panel setting
(e.g., Goodman-Bacon, 2021).

Two  economic  channels  stand  out  as  chief  candidates  to  explain
our results. First, workers may view Uber as a short-term alternative
for a recently lost job, to be used while seeking gainful reemployment
elsewhere. Consistent with the short-term treatment of the ride-sharing
platform,  accounts  of  government  workers  moonlighting  in  the  gig
economy during recent government shutdowns were widely publicized
by the media and policy makers alike (Little, 2013; Halsey and Aratani,
2019). Consistent with this idea, 32% of Uber drivers report ‘‘earning
money  while  looking  for  a  steady,  full-time  job’’  as  a  major  reason

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

for  participating  on  the  platform  (Hall  and  Krueger, 2018).  Impor-
tantly,  this  mechanism  represents  a  structural  shift  likely  to  benefit
a  broad  group  of  laid-off  workers.  Alternatively,  workers  may  treat
labor prospects associated with the ride-sharing platform as ubiquitous
long-term job opportunities. Anecdotal evidence notwithstanding, we
perform a series of tests to shed light on the channel through which
Uber’s entry affects labor markets.

First, we consider various subsets of workers less likely to view Uber
as a long-term employment prospect. We find economically significant
results  when  restricting  the  sample  to  (a)  those  who  regain  formal
employment at another firm within 12 months of the initial layoff, and
(b) workers from above-median income ZIP codes (with average yearly
household income of $134k). We also exploit geographic variation in
UI benefit generosity across states. If a worker treats Uber as a short-
term  solution  and  potential  substitute  for  UI,  this  tradeoff  is  likely
to be influenced by the potential UI benefits available. We find that
the effects of Uber’s entry are stronger in states with less generous UI
benefits.

Overall, this series of tests suggests that Uber alters labor market
dynamics by increasing the pool of easily accessible short-term jobs,
acting  as  a  substitute  for  credit  usage.  While  our  analysis  focuses
on Uber, the economic mechanism we identify is likely to extend to
a  broad  class  of  gig-labor  firms  that  offer  laid-off  workers  an  abil-
ity to supply a discretionary amount of labor almost instantaneously
(e.g., TaskRabbit, Thumbtack, etc.).

Our  paper  contributes  to  several  strands  of  literature.  First,  our
paper speaks to the literature examining the effects of consumer credit
decisions on the local economy. For instance, underpinned by the role
credit plays in smoothing income shocks, Herkenhoff (2019) establishes
a link between greater access to unsecured revolving credit and mod-
erately deeper recessions. In the context of the financial crisis, house-
hold  leverage  choices  have  been  linked  to  employment  (Bernstein,
2021; Mian and Sufi, 2014; Bethune, 2015), consumption (Mian et al.,
2013),  and  housing  prices  (Mian  and  Sufi, 2011).  This  fragility  is
accentuated  following  a  job  loss; Braxton  et  al. (2020)  present  evi-
dence of an increase in credit defaults among credit constrained house-
holds and Gerardi et al. (2017) document a rise in mortgage defaults,
while (Herkenhoff and Ohanian, 2012) examine a worker’s propensity
to  skip  mortgage  payments  as  a  form  of  ‘‘informal’’  UI.  We  add  to
this strand, finding that laid-off workers partially substitute away from
credit usage. At the same time, Hsu et al. (2018) highlight the role of
UI as a housing market stabilizer, helping individuals avoid foreclosure
and the associated deadweight loss. We find that relative delinquency
rates decrease following Uber’s entry into a market, a notable response
given  the  individual  consequences  of  having  a  poor  credit  history.
This result also suggests that the introduction of the gig economy is
better able to insulate a local area from the propagation of economic
shocks.

Second, our paper adds to the expansive literature examining dif-
ferent  facets  of  unemployment  insurance  programs,  including  labor
market  implications  and  optimality  (Flemming, 1978; Baily, 1978;
Mortensen, 1977). Gruber (1997) highlights the consumption-smoothing
benefit associated with UI programs, which is examined in more depth
by both (Ganong and Noel, 2019) and Kolsrud et al. (2018). While we
do not examine consumption directly, the substitution of UI implied by
our results suggests through revealed preferences that the ride-sharing
platform allows individuals to achieve a more desirable consumption
path. There is an equally large body of work on the costs associated
with UI, the disincentive to seek re-employment (e.g., Katz and Meyer,
1990; Meyer, 1990; Card  et  al., 2007; Schmieder  et  al., 2012).  In
relation, our paper highlights the important role that the gig economy
plays in reducing labor market frictions, and thus, the degree to which
moral hazard plays a role.

Finally, our paper contributes to a growing literature on the role of
ride-sharing companies in labor and product markets. Several studies

2 

V. Fos et al.

document  how  Uber’s  entry  affected  purchases  of  new  cars  and  ve-
hicle  utilization  rates  (e.g., Cramer  and  Krueger, 2016; Gong  et  al.,
2017; Buchak, 2018).1 Additional  evidence  documents  the  increase
in  competitive  pressure  faced  by  taxi  drivers  following  Uber’s  entry
(e.g., Hall  et  al., 2017; Berger  et  al., 2018).  Entrepreneurial  effects
of ride-sharing are slightly more nuanced, with (Barrios et al., 2020)
finding an increase in new business incorporations while (Burtch et al.,
2018) find a negative effect on self-employment reported in the CPS,
possibly suggesting differential effects with respect to the quality of
entrepreneurship.2

Our paper is closely related to Koustas (2018) and Jackson (2019).
Using account-level data from an online account aggregator, Koustas
(2018) shows the ride-sharing platform’s use in supplementing income
when a worker faces a partial loss of primary job income. They show
the smoothing effect of platform participation on consumption patterns
and credit card balances using variation in hourly workers for iden-
tification.  We  compliment  this  result  by  examining  the  ride-sharing
platform’s  role  in  blunting  a  worker’s  complete  loss  of  her  primary
source of income. Our setting extends the examination of credit card
balances to a broader set of workers which includes salaried employees,
while  offering  a  more  complete  picture  provided  by  a  worker’s  full
set  of  credit  obligations,  delinquency  behavior,  and  UI  usage.  Our
findings contribute to the literature on the relation between post-layoff
UI and credit usage and household welfare, and more broadly on their
potential macro-economic implications (e.g., Mian et al. (2013)). Using
annual tax filings, Jackson (2019) examines the short- and medium-
term impact of the gig economy on traditional employment and earned
income. The paper finds that among individuals receiving UI benefits,
access to the gig economy increases one-year income while two- to four-
year income lags expected levels, interpreted as individuals forgoing
traditional reemployment. Leveraging individual-level data that does
not  require  a  UI  claim  to  identify  a  layoff,  our  paper  compliments
this  work  by  highlighting  the  effect  of  the  gig  economy  on  credit
utilization, delinquencies, and UI utilization. Interestingly, our effects
hold for employees who return to traditional employment within one
year, which suggests another channel beyond a worker opting out of
the traditional labor market. Importantly, the effect of the gig economy
on delinquency rates suggests that the change in credit performance
among  laid-off  workers  is  an  important  ingredient  that  should  be
considered when assessing the overall impact of the gig economy.

2.  Data

This section describes the data used, discusses our sample selection

process, and presents summary statistics for the final sample.

2.1.  Uber introduction data

We  obtain  the  comprehensive  set  of  product  launch  dates  that
occurred between June 2012 and February 2016 from Uber. The data
covers approximately 120 Core-based Statistical Areas (CBSAs) and four
product  lines  (e.g.,  ‘‘UberBLACK’’).  While  the  ride-sharing  company
offers multiple products we focus on the introduction of ‘‘UberX’’, a
product for which the largest share of the population has access to a
qualifying vehicle.3

Fig. 1 illustrates the variation in Uber’s entry across different mar-
kets.  Panel  A  of Fig.  1 reports  a  histogram  of  the  monthly  count

1 Barrios et al. (2018) show that the arrival of ride-sharing is associated
with an increase in the number of motor vehicle fatalities and fatal accidents.
2 In a recent paper, Ostrovsky and Schwarz (2018) develop a theoretical
framework  to  study  implications  of  the  gig  economy  for  the  efficiency  of
transportation markets.

3 While UberX represents the first service introduced in a majority (79%)
of the regions in our sample, in the remaining instances its introduction lags
behind UberBLACK by an average of 7 months.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

of markets in which UberX is introduced. The panel demonstrates a
considerable degree of time-series variation in entry. Panel B of Fig. 1
illustrates the relative timing of entry across different states. The panel
reports a heat (choropleth) map of the percentile rank of initial entry
into  a  state.  Uber  traditionally  entered  large,  coastal  regions  first,
followed by more central areas.4

2.2.  Credit, employment, and UI

The data from Equifax Inc. contains anonymized individual-level in-
formation across the following three dimensions: credit, job separation
events, and UI participation. The first of these, consumer credit his-
tories, contains credit line-level information at the monthly frequency
for all individuals with some form of credit history in the U.S., and in-
cludes information such as account type (e.g., credit card, home loan),
borrower location, account age, total borrowing, account balance, any
missed or late payments, and defaults. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to use the credit panel linked to individual-level job
separation and UI participation data from Equifax.

Job separation data are disseminated to Equifax by self-reporting
employers  who  subscribe  to  UI  management  services  provided  by
Equifax. When a UI claim is filed, government agencies acquire the
terms of separation from the ex-employer to verify UI eligibility.5 Many
states require employers to respond to all such government requests to
facilitate  the  efficient  administration  of  UI  claims.  Participating  em-
ployers subscribe to Equifax UI management services, which manages
all such requests on their behalf. As a result, employers report data
related  to  all  incidences  of  job  separation  to  Equifax.  Using  these
data,  for  each  job  separation,  we  are  able  to  observe  the  date  of
the job separation and the reason for the separation. As part of the
process, Equifax receives administrative data related to all monetary
disbursements received by laid-off workers.

The focal event we study is an individual’s job separation. However,
a worker may lose her job for a number of reasons, which may influence
credit and UI participation decisions. For instance, it is plausible that
an  individual  intending  to  quit  her  current  job  will  reduce  credit
utilization prior to the event. A worker would also be ineligible for UI
benefits in this instance, as UI eligibility requirements require that a
worker lose the job through no fault of her own. Thus, the inclusion
of individuals who experience a voluntary job separation may result
in biased estimates. An ideal setting would consider unanticipated job
losses, unrelated to a worker’s actions or labor productivity. To this end,
we begin by identifying instances of involuntary job loss (i.e., layoffs)
based  on  the  employer-provided  reason  description.  Specifically,  we
identify individuals who were separated from their employer due to
a lack of work or firm-level conditions (e.g., cash shortage). We merge
this sample of separations to state-provided UI data and credit histories
that allow us to examine a large set of outcomes for laid-off individuals.
Our sample covers a relatively large share of job separations in the
U.S., approximately 25% of all separations reported in the Bureau of La-
bor Statistics (BLS)’s Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS)
data over our sample period.6 Yet, the self-selection of employers into
Equifax’s UI management service raises potential generalizability con-
cerns. To evaluate this concern, we validate the representativeness of
our sample using CPS-derived statistics as the benchmark. Specifically,
we contrast our sample of laid-off workers against the Displaced Worker

4 Appendix  Figure  OA.1  reports  a  similar  heat  map  when  first  ranking
individual CBSAs by order of entry, and then displaying the state-level average
percentile across all CBSAs in the state. The figure presents similar patterns to
that of Fig. 1.

5 One  of  the  eligibility  requirements  require  that  claimants  must  have

separated from the employer involuntarily due to no fault of their own.

6 The JOLTS program from BLS provides data on job openings, hires, and

separations.

3 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Fig. 1. Timing of Uber entry.
This figure illustrates the variation in Uber’s entry into markets. Panel A reports the number of markets entered through time. Panel B presents a choropleth (geographic heat
map) of the order of Uber’s first entry into a state.

(DW) supplement of the CPS, which is comprised of workers who lost
or left a job due to layoffs or shutdowns.7

We begin by contrasting the industry composition of our sample of
laid-off workers to that of the DW supplement. Panel A of Fig. 2 reports
the relative industry share of our sample and the 2014 CPS, revealing
a reasonable degree of divergence across the two sources. Our sample
tends to over-represent Accommodation & Food, Manufacturing, Retail,
and Admin. & Waste Management, while under-weighting Construction,
Health Care, Professional & Scientific Services, and Other. Such differences
are particularly important in the context of our research question and
outcomes of interest (e.g., UI usage). To the extent that workers across
different industries hold differential beliefs regarding re-employment
prospects, reflected in their response to job loss, this non-representative

7 One caveat of this analysis is that, because individual characteristics are
gathered as a part of a different management service, a firm must subscribe
to both UI management and this second service to be included in the analysis.
The majority of firms in our sample meet this requirement.

industry composition makes it difficult to draw conclusions that extend
beyond  our  sample.  To  account  for  such  differences,  we  re-weight
our sample to match the industry share of the 2014 DW supplement,
reporting weighted (and unweighted) results for the remainder of the
paper.8

In the remaining panels, we examine unweighted and weighted vari-
ants of characteristics common to both datasets: gender (Panels B and
C), homeownership (Panels D and E), and age bins (Panels F and G).
Following industry re-weighting, we see a general reduction in outcome
differences for our sample relative to the CPS. Notable examples include
a near-complete reduction in gender representation differences, a more

8 Each vintage surveys individuals in the CPS who have been displaced at
any point over the previous 3 years. Our sample of layoffs runs from June
2011 to February 2017, generally spanned by the union of the 2014, 2016, and
2018 DW supplements. While we opt for weights based on the 2014 industry
composition, industry shares are extremely similar to the average from 2014
to 2018, exhibiting a correlation of 0.99.

4 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Fig. 2. Representativeness of worker characteristics.
This figure reports worker characteristics in our sample of laid-off workers (Sample) and the CPS displaced worker supplement (CPS). The table reports the relative share in each
sample across industry (Panel A), gender (Panel B and C), home ownership status (Panel D and E), and age bins (Panel F and G). The figure reports the share in the unweighted
sample and when re-weighting our sample by the industry composition of the CPS sample.

5 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

representative share of age 15–25 workers, and a modest improvement
in homeownership rates.9 Yet, our sample still understates the share of
age 25–35 workers and homeowners. We revisit the extent to which
these differences impact overall UI participation rates below.10

Finally, it is important to note that UI benefits are generally ad-
ministered under the Federal-State Unemployment Insurance Program.
While national guidelines are established by the Department of Labor,
each state sets its own parameters governing eligibility. State unem-
ployment programs vary over the determination of benefit amounts,
maximum benefit caps, and the duration of benefit payments. At the
same time, for those falling below the cap, UI benefits typically equal
50%  of  a  worker’s  pre-layoff  wages.  In  contrast, Hall  and  Krueger
(2018) estimate that individuals participating on the ride-sharing plat-
form earn approximately $19 per hour as of October 2015. Moreover,
UI  benefits  are  typically  offset  by  income  earned  during  the  unem-
ployment spell after weekly earnings pass a low threshold (e.g., $50
in  Virginia).  Taken  together  with  the  added  flexibility  of  a  worker
being able to provide labor when her time-varying reservation wage
is  lowest  (Chen  et  al., 2017),  it  is  plausible  that  a  recently  laid-off
worker may view participating on the platform as a preferred option
to receiving unemployment benefits.

2.3.  Car registration

The final source of data is car registration information collected by
R.L. Polk, provided by Equifax. The data are based on car registrations
filed with 48 state motor vehicle authorities (e.g., DMVs and RMVs)
from 2010 onward, and includes all new and used car transactions.11
The  registration  data  include  vehicle  identification  numbers  (VINs),
from which we are able to identify key vehicle characteristics including
make, model, and year of manufacture.

2.4.  Final sample

With these data in hand, we construct two samples to be used in
matching empirical strategies. Both samples begin with the full set of
job separations, which we identify as being a layoff, yielding a sample
of 19.6 million such events. For the first sample, we start with layoffs
that occur within 12 months of the first or last Uber entry date in our
sample (January 2011 and December 2016), and to CBSAs where Uber
enters at some point in our sample period, reducing the sample to 9.2
million layoffs. Finally, we take the intersection of this sample and the
set of individuals from our car registration dataset with a car between
10 and 20 years of age at the time of layoff, yielding a final sample
containing 263k layoffs. We refer to this as our ‘‘car age’’ sample. For
the second sample, we again start from the full set of 19.6M layoffs.
While this sample does not require an individual to be present in our
car registration data, we are forced to reduce this sample to a random
sample of 1M observations, necessitated by computational restrictions

9 Note,  as  our  sample  infers  home  ownership  from  the  existence  of  a
mortgage, we are unable to identify individuals who own their homes outright.
10 Figure  OA.3  performs  a  similar  comparison  for  all  workers  (without
conditioning on a job separation) employed by firms in our sample against
employed individuals in the CPS. Both industry representation and the effect
of  re-weighting  are  generally  similar  in  this  comparison.  Moreover, Kalda
(2019) contrasts credit outcomes for workers of firms self-selecting into the
employment or income verification services against the general population,
finding that though workers in the employment data have a slightly greater
number of credit card, auto, and home loan accounts, conditional on having
these accounts hold similar balances, and overall have similar credit scores.
Below, we compare credit outcomes for our final sample against the general
population.
11 New  Hampshire  and  Pennsylvania  are  not  included  in  the  data.  In
addition, the data from Arkansas, Hawaii and Washington are only available
beginning in 2015.

put in place by the host site where the data resides. Finally, we impose
the same Uber entry related restrictions as in the first sample, yielding a
second sample containing 495k layoffs. We refer to this as our ‘‘broad’’
sample.

Table  1 reports  summary  statistics  for  both  samples,  both  un-
weighted and DW industry re-weighted. The table reports observations
at  a  monthly  level,  and  includes  the  25-month  period  surrounding
a  given  layoff.  Panel  A  describes  our  car  age  sample.  Focusing  on
the  weighted  statistics,  workers  have  an  average  outstanding  debt
balance of roughly $77k. Moreover, they are delinquent on their debt
obligations in a non-negligible portion of the sample, with a 14.1%
likelihood of being 90+ days delinquent on at least one line of credit
at  any  given  point  in  time.  Interestingly,  weighted  variants  of  each
statistic are greater than their unweighted counterparts. Similarly, we
see an increase in the monthly probability of a UI benefit reception,
which  averages  4.15%  in  the  weighted  sample  versus  2.64%  in  the
unweighted sample.

Panel  B  of Table  1 turns  to  our  broad  sample,  which  does  not
condition on being in the car registration data set. Relative to the first
sample, workers have a significantly lower average outstanding debt
balance  of  $28.7k,  which  is  perhaps  not  unexpected  as  this  sample
does not require an individual to own a vehicle. Workers have a similar
degree of credit worthiness with an average delinquency rate of 16.9%.
Finally, the propensity to draw UI benefits in a given month is slightly
greater, with a monthly probability of 4.66%.

The remaining panels bisect our sample into pre-layoff and post-
layoff periods. Perhaps unsurprisingly, after a layoff a worker’s debt
balances, the likelihood of credit delinquencies, and the likelihood of
receiving UI benefits sharply increase.12 We see a starker effect of re-
weighting  on  the  monthly  likelihood  of  receiving  UI  benefits  in  the
post-layoff  period.  Specifically,  in  the  car  age  sample,  the  monthly
probability of receiving UI benefits increases from 4.5% to 8.9% fol-
lowing re-weighting, while increasing from 2.9% to 8.8% in the broad
sample.

Before continuing, we examine our sample’s representativeness with
respect to UI participation when benchmarked to the existing literature
and census data. As one point of reference, using administrative data
from 6 states from 1979 to 1983, Anderson and Meyer (1997) find that
while 23.6% of job separators receive UI benefits, this value increases to
39.1% when attempting to filter out job-to-job quits, and 53.6% when
further restricting to firms with mass layoffs.13 While providing one
source of comparison, given the 29-year gap between the two sample
periods and the record low UI participation rates experienced in the
years leading up to our sample (McKenna and McHugh, 2016), we find
it useful to benchmark our sample to more timely statistics. To this end,
we derive two comparable statistics from the DW supplement. First, we
examine a displaced worker’s likelihood of receiving any UI benefits,
which fell steadily in the CPS in recent years, with bi-yearly values of
39.8% (2014), 36.0% (2016), and 31.4% (2018). In comparison, the
re-weighted share is 32.9% in the car age sample and 31.0% in the
broad sample.

In  a  second  comparison,  we  attempt  to  recreate  our  monthly  UI
recipient variable, Benefit Received, in the CPS supplement. Crucially,
the  DW  supplement  also  reports  the  duration  of  the  unemployment
spell.  With  the  additional  assumptions  that  (1)  a  worker  receiving
UI benefits files for unemployment immediately upon layoff and (2)
UI  benefits  are  exhausted  after  6  months,  we  are  able  to  construct

12 Positive pre-layoff UI benefit values are consistent with a worker being
laid off from a previous job, receiving UI benefits, becoming reemployed at a
firm in our sample, and subsequently being laid off again.
13 Of note, job-to-job transitions are inferred from a drop of no more than
2 weeks of wages. This likely overstates true J-to-J quits, also including laid
off workers who quickly find re-employment.

6 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 1
Summary statistics.
This table reports summary statistics for our main samples. While Panels A and B report them for our car-age and broad
samples respectively, Panels C and D report the mean values pre- and post-layoff across the two samples.
Panel A: Car-age sample

Number of Accounts
Number of Credit Card Accounts
Number of Home Loans
Total Debt ($)
Credit Card Debt ($)
Home Loans ($)
Any Delinquency (%)
Credit Card Delinquency (%)
Home Loans Delinquency (%)
Benefit Received (%)
Benefit Amount ($)
Panel B: Broad sample

Number of Accounts
Number of Credit Card Accounts
Number of Home Loans
Total Debt ($)
Credit Card Debt ($)
Home Loans ($)
Any Delinquency (%)
Credit Card Delinquency (%)
Home Loans Delinquency (%)
Benefit Received (%)
Benefit Amount ($)
Panel C: Car-age sample

Total Debt ($)
Credit Card Debt ($)
Home Loans ($)
Any Delinquency (%)
Credit Card Delinquency (%)
Home Loans Delinquency (%)
Benefit Received (%)
Benefit Amount ($)
Panel D: Broad sample

Total Debt ($)
Credit Card Debt ($)
Home Loans ($)
Any Delinquency (%)
Credit Card Delinquency (%)
Home Loans Delinquency (%)
Benefit Received (%)
Benefit Amount ($)

N

6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412
6,535,412

N

12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167
12,277,167

Unweighted

Pre-Layoff

64 664
2803
43 356
11.43
5.66
1.38
0.79
3.19

(Unweighted)

(Weighted)

mean

7.87
2.27
0.61
66 310
2876
44 891
12.56
6.46
1.83
2.64
12.55

sd

6.06
2.50
0.99
102 840
6079
91 201
33.13
24.58
13.39
16.04
82.66

mean

8.89
2.57
0.70
77 464
3282
52 567
14.07
7.14
2.13
4.15
16.92

(Unweighted)

(Weighted)

mean

5.11
1.23
0.24
31 991
1149
11 653
16.33
6.341
1.05
1.66
18.86

Post-Layoff

67 962
2949
46 431
13.69
7.26
2.27
4.49
21.87

sd

4.22
1.89
0.50
45 596
2174
34 116
36.96
24.37
10.19
12.79
181.48

mean

5.63
1.62
0.29
28 713
1099
10 486
16.90
6.91
1.21
4.66
21.86

Weighted

Pre-Layoff

75 305
3192
50 654
12.69
6.21
1.62
0.71
2.96

Weighted

Pre-Layoff

mean

28 390
1048
10 126
16.24
6.13
1.03
0.41
2.61

sd

13.29
4.72
1.78
189 751
10 250
162 033
56.17
39.68
23.14
22.11
118.43

sd

4.42
1.74
0.59
44 273
1917
32 552
37.48
25.35
10.93
12.79
181.48

Post-Layoff

79 632
3374
54 495
15.46
8.08
2.66
8.92
35.86

Post-Layoff

mean

29 027
1136
11 113
17.91
7.98
1.62
8.77
36.32

Unweighted

Pre-Layoff

Post-Layoff

mean

32 440
1099
12 180
15.80
6.58
0.96
0.37
1.41

mean

31 580
1187
11 170
16.80
7.24
1.16
2.86
34.10

a comparable statistic.14 Re-creating Benefit Received in different CPS
vintages produces a monthly probability of receiving UI benefits of 11%
(2016) and 8.9% (2018). In contrast, the analogous measure in our
sample averages 8.9% in the car age sample and 8.8% in the broad
sample.  Taken  together,  these  comparisons  are  consistent  with  our
sample having reasonably similar, if not slightly lower, UI participation
rates than those estimated in recent CPS vintages. While a useful point

14 To the extent that a worker does not immediately apply for UI benefits,
perhaps in anticipation of quickly finding reemployment, the first assumption
will lead to an over-statement of the true monthly probability of UI receipt.
Moreover,  the  potential  for  a  worker  to  exhaust  UI  benefits  prior  to  the
6-month mark also leads to an overstatement of the point estimate.

of reference, some divergence in point estimates is to be expected given
the  differences  in  the  construction  of  the  two  samples.  One  notable
example is the CPS restriction that excludes workers under the age of
20, potentially inflating the UI participation rate estimate in the DW
sample.15

Finally,  we  contrast  our  broad  sample  of  workers  to  the  general
population with respect to different credit outcomes. While we would
not necessarily expect credit outcomes of our sample (which conditions
on  being  laid-off)  to  mirror  those  of  a  randomly  selected  sample  of
individuals with a credit bureau file, we find the comparison useful to

15 This assumes that UI participation is positively correlated with age, an
assumption we verify in the DW supplement.

7 

V. Fos et al.

better understand our sample of laid-off workers. Figure OA.4 compares
outstanding balances (Panels A to D), and the number of outstanding
credit lines (Panels E to H). In general, kernel density plots show our
sample is less likely to carry a very low outstanding balance across all
credit types, with this excess mass spread throughout the remainder
of the distribution. Similarly, our sample has slightly more open credit
lines in total, while being more likely to have at least one open auto or
mortgage-related credit line.

3.  Empirical strategy

Does the rise of the gig economy curtail an individual’s reliance
on consumer credit and UI following job separation? We answer this
question  by  exploiting  the  staggered  entry  of  Uber  across  different
geographic regions over time. If the ride-sharing platform reduces labor
market frictions, the ability of a worker to buffer her labor provision
by participating on the ride-share platform may reduce the hardship
associated with job loss.

3.1.  General approach

The staggered nature by which Uber entered different CBSAs con-
stitutes  the  first  dimension  for  each  of  our  empirical  strategies.  To
illustrate this, suppose individuals experience a change in an outcome
of interest (e.g., credit delinquency) following a job layoff. If well iden-
tified, the difference-in-difference estimator made up of the interaction
of an indicator variable for a job layoff (the second dimension in each
strategy)  and  Uber’s  presence  represents  the  unconditional  effect  of
Uber’s entrance on the post job loss change in outcome.16

Given  our  use  of  staggered  entry  across  markets,  it  is  useful  to
understand what drives the timing of this entry. Buchak (2018) argues
that Uber’s entry into a market is largely dictated by population size
and prevalence of smart phones. Figure OA.2 supports this assertion,
plotting the relation between 2012 CBSA-level census population esti-
mates and Uber entry. Consistent with Buchak (2018), we find a strong
downward-sloping  relationship  in  which  Uber  enters  larger  markets
first. By the end of our sample period, Uber is present in 69.1% of all
CBSAs by population count. However, this gives rise to the potential
concern  that  a  worker’s  response  to  job  loss  also  varies  by  market
size. Our empirical specifications are informed by this possibility, in
which multiple controls are allowed to vary at the CBSA-level, which
we describe in more detail below.

While  the  introduction  of  the  ride-sharing  platform  may  provide
temporary  reemployment  prospects,  not  all  individuals  are  equally
likely to benefit. Instead, one must first have access to a vehicle that
meets  Uber’s  eligibility  requirements.  The  easiest  way  to  meet  this
criterion is to already possess such a vehicle. This idea motivates our
two complimentary empirical strategies.

3.2.  Car-age based empirical approach

The first strategy provides tight identification by exploiting varia-
tion in Uber eligibility across car owners. Specifically, while eligibility
requirements  exhibit  some  variation  over  time,  a  qualifying  vehicle
must  generally  be  a  four-door  sedan  that  is  less  than  15  years  old.
In a similar spirit to Buchak (2018), our empirical strategy is based
on this latter requirement, leveraging car registration data to compare
individuals  with  eligible  vehicles  between  10  and  15  years  of  age
(eligible car owners) to those with vehicles between 15 and 20 years
old who do not qualify (noneligible owners).

16 More recently, the estimation of staggered difference-in-differences esti-
mators in a panel setting has come into question (e.g., Goodman-Bacon, 2021).
We show robustness of our main results to this concern in Section 4.3.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

One concern might be that geographic regions exhibit varying de-
grees of car eligibility. Appendix Table OA.1 reports the average rate
of car eligibility in our sample by state. Eligibility shares appear to
be quite homogeneous across states. Nevertheless, while this strategy
exploits variation within car owners based on eligibility requirements
to help alleviate identification concerns, it does so by focusing on a
narrower  subset  of  laid-off  workers.  We  revisit  this  tradeoff  in  our
second empirical strategy.

Combining Uber’s staggered entry across markets, variation in car
eligibility, and the change in a worker’s outcome following job loss
produces a ‘‘triple diff-in-diff’’ estimator, which we formally describe
in Eq. (1). For each worker 𝑖, we denote the month of the job separation
(layoff ) by 𝑆𝑖. We retain the 25-month period surrounding this event.17
Variation in layoff dates results in an unbalanced panel with respect to
calendar time. With this panel, we estimate empirical specifications of
the following form:
𝑦𝑖𝑗 𝑡 = 𝜂 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗 + 𝛽𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡

+ 𝛿𝑗 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑗 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝜙𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗 𝑡,

(1)

where 𝑦𝑖𝑗 𝑡 represents the outcome of interest (e.g., credit delinquencies)
is  an
for  individual 𝑖,  in  CBSA 𝑗,  in  calendar  month 𝑡. 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡
indicator  variable  that  takes  a  value  of  one  for  individual 𝑖 for  all
months 𝑡 ≥ 𝑆𝑖. 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 is an indicator variable that takes a value of one
for CBSA 𝑗 if Uber operates in the area as of month 𝑡. 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗
is an indicator that takes a value of one if the age of individual 𝑖’s car
in the month prior to layoff is less than 15 years old. The sample is
limited  to  car  owners  whose  vehicles  are  between  10  and  20  years
old.  Our  variable  of  interest  is  the  triple  interaction  of  these  three
terms: 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 , 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟, and 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟. This interaction captures the
differential  effect  of  Uber’s  presence  on  eligible  car  owners  relative
to noneligible car owners following job loss. There are two things to
note  about  our  empirical  strategy.  First,  to  the  extent  that  another
ride-sharing  platform  operates  in  a  CBSA  prior  to  Uber’s  entry,  a
subset of eligible car owners will be incorrectly assigned to the control
group. The result is an attenuation in the point estimate of the triple-
interaction  term.18 Second,  similar  to Barrios  et  al. (2020),  we  are
unable to observe the propensity of a laid-off worker we classify as
being an eligible car owner to participate on the platform.19 As such,
𝜂 is an estimate of the unconditional differential effect of Uber’s entry
across all laid-off workers we classify as having an eligible car.

As noted above, Uber’s entry is strongly correlated with population
counts, which may also impact an individual’s response to layoffs. In
response to this, we allow the general response to layoff 𝛽 to vary at the
CBSA-month level. Doing so not only controls for general differences in
the response to job loss across different size cities, but the interaction
with month fixed effects allows this difference to vary over time for a
given CBSA, accounting for changes in local economic conditions.20 Our
strategy also exploits variation in the age of a worker’s vehicle. Given

17 In an extremely small number of cases, a worker in our sample experi-
ences two distinct layoffs. For such individuals, we retain the 25-month period
around both layoffs.
18 While  we  do  not  consider  Lyft’s  entry  in  our  empirical  strategy,  it
generally coincides with or lags Uber’s entry into the CBSAs in our sample.
In fact, in only 7 CBSAs does Lyft enter more than one month earlier than
Uber, 3 of which it enters 2 months in advance. Untabulated results show that
our main results are robust to the exclusion of these 7 CBSAs, which makes
up approximately 10% of our sample.
19 This  limitation  is  related  to  that  of Buchak (2018),  which  is  able  to
measure a change in purchases of eligible cars following Uber’s entry, but
is unable to distinguish between individuals purchasing cars to drive for Uber
and those purchasing an eligible car for the optionality to possibly drive for a
ride-sharing platform in the future.
20 Doing so also subsumes one double-interaction term traditionally included
in a triple diff-in-diff (𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟).

8 

V. Fos et al.

the plausible correlation between the ownership of a younger versus
older vehicle and other characteristics (e.g., wealth), response to job
loss might also vary with the choice of vehicle age. For this reason,
we interact 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 𝑡, a vector of indicator variables corresponding to
the yearly values of car age for individual 𝑖, with 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 . We allow
this control (which subsumes 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 × 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟) to vary across
CBSAs, again reflecting the nonrandom entry of Uber across regions.
To account for the final double interaction (𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟 × 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟), we
interact 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 with the vector of car age indicators, accounting for a
post-Uber change in outcomes for eligible vs. noneligible car owners
regardless of employment status (e.g., as a supplement to traditional
income Koustas, 2018).  Similar  to  the  previous  terms,  we  against
allow for this effect to vary across CBSAs to account for potentially
differential responses in more versus less populous areas. Finally, we in-
clude an individual fixed effect, 𝜙𝑖, to absorb individual time-invariant
unobservable characteristics which could correlate with the reliance on
credit and delinquency rates.21

3.3.  Broad sample empirical approach

While  the  previous  strategy  offers  identification  using within  car
owner variation stemming from Uber-imposed eligibility requirements,
it  does  so  by  concentrating  on  a  somewhat  narrow  subset  of  the
population. Our second empirical strategy compliments the previous
approach, designed to draw conclusions over a broader share of the
population.

This approach contrasts the response of laid-off workers for which
we proxy as more broadly having access to a vehicle. Specifically, we
use an individual’s credit history to identify car owners. We classify
anyone with an auto loan or lease between 2000 and the month before
getting laid off as being a car owner, 𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟. By considering all individ-
uals with an observable credit history, we are able to consider a much
wider set of laid-off workers. Fortunately, incorporating this change
into  our  previous  empirical  strategy  only  requires  one  modification
to  Eq.  (1).  The  resulting  equation,  where  we  replace 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟
with 𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟, is as follows:
𝑦𝑖𝑗 𝑡 = 𝜂 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 × 𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗 + 𝛽𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡

+ 𝛿𝑗 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗 𝑡 + 𝜇𝑗 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 × 𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗 𝑡 + 𝜙𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗 𝑡,
where 𝑦𝑖𝑗 𝑡 denotes the outcome of interest (e.g., credit delinquencies)
for individual 𝑖, in CBSA 𝑗, in calendar month 𝑡. Mirroring our first
approach, we again allow post-layoff responses to vary at the CBSA-
time level to account for changing local economic conditions, and allow
the double-interaction terms to vary at the CBSA level to reflect the
non-random nature by which Uber entered different markets.

Finally, we note that while pre-layoff ownership of an eligible car
is perhaps the most likely means of participating on the ride-sharing
platform,  this  requirement  may  be  met  by  a  number  of  alternative
means. First, a worker may purchase a qualifying vehicle following job
loss in order to participate on the platform. However, in contrast to
the  unconditional  increase  in  auto  purchases  following  Uber’s  entry
documented  by Buchak (2018),  the  newly  unemployed  likely  face
significantly  larger  frictions  when  attempting  to  purchase  a  vehicle
relative  to  the  general  population.  Consistent  with  this  conjecture,
unreported results indicate no evidence of a change in the likelihood
of  purchasing  a  qualifying  vehicle  in  the  months  surrounding  job
loss pre- and post-Uber entry. Second, a recently laid-off worker may
participate in a car rental program provided by Uber. However, the
earliest such program was initiated in a limited number of markets in
August 2015 (Uber, 2019), six months before the final cohort of laid-off
workers we consider. Third, a noneligible car owner may participate on
the platform by partnering with someone with an eligible car. While

(2)

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

this  possibility  exists,  we  are  unable  to  observe  such  instances  and
cannot  comment  on  their  frequency.  Importantly,  these  possibilities
and the resulting misclassification of car eligibility will attenuate point
estimates and bias against finding an effect.

3.4.  Re-weighting approach & empirical approach caveats

Having laid out our two empirical strategies, we now discuss our
approach to account for the non-representative industry composition
in  our  two  samples.  Recall  that  because  our  ability  to  observe  job
separations is predicated on the self-selection of employers into the UI
management service, our sample over-weights some industries relative
to the DW supplement. Fortunately, accounting for such differences is a
straightforward process in our broad sample. When estimating Eq. (2),
for each observation 𝑖 we assign a weight of 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑐 𝑝𝑠
, where
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝,𝑏𝑟𝑜𝑎𝑑 is worker 𝑖’s industry share observed in our broad sample.
For example, if retail workers account for 10% of layoffs in the general
population and 20% in our sample, each retail worker in our sample
would receive a weight of 0.5.

𝑖 ∕𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝,𝑏𝑟𝑜𝑎𝑑

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

∕𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝,𝑐 𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑔 𝑒

We now turn to the narrower sample, made up of laid-off work-
ers  also  present  in  the  car  registration  data.  In  an  ideal  setting,  we
would simply apply the same re-weighting scheme with correspond-
ing weights 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑝,𝑐 𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑔 𝑒
, where 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑝,𝑐 𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑔 𝑒 is the industry
share of laid-off workers in the general population owning a car 10–
20 years old. Unfortunately, the CPS does not contain sufficient detail
to estimate the industry share for this subpopulation. At the same time,
it is useful to recognize that any difference in our narrow sample and
the  general  population  stems  from  two  potential  sources  of  bias.  In
addition to the same employer-participation bias present in the broad
sample, if our car registration data is not a good representation of the
general population of older car owners then this might also serve as
a potential source of bias. However, to the extent that either (a) the
industry composition of our car registration data (without condition-
ing  on  being  in  our  layoff  sample)  is  representative  of  the  broader
population,  or  (b)  the  difference  in  industry  shares  is  uncorrelated
with industry-level differential treatment effects (e.g., the propensity of
eligible car owners to benefit from the introduction of Uber), the bias
in our narrow sample will mirror that of our broad sample.22 If this
is indeed the case, we are able to account for the non-representative
industry composition of our sample by using the same weights as used
in the broad sample (𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑐 𝑝𝑠
). Given the un-testable nature
of this assumption, or even a prior on the sign of the correlation (if
any) between industry representation and treatment effects, we opt to
use the same weights as in our broad sample.

𝑖 ∕𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝,𝑓 𝑢𝑙 𝑙

𝑖

While industry re-weighting reduces observable differences between
our sample and CPS data (see Section 2.2 above) to the point of exhibit-
ing similar UI participation rates, we cannot rule out the possibility that
our sample if not fully representative of laid-off workers. This goal is
made more challenging by CPS survey parameters, which exclude some
workers (e.g., less than 20 years old), time-varying trends in displaced
worker outcomes in CPS data over our sample period, and estimate
uncertainty in the CPS given the survey size.

3.5.  Identifying assumptions

While the definition of a worker likely to benefit from Uber’s entry
varies across the two empirical strategies (e.g., owners of 10–15 year
cars),  the  identifying  assumption  underlying  each  is  the  same:  the
timing of Uber’s entry into a market is orthogonal to omitted variables
that would (1) influence the outcome of interest for an eligible worker
relative to a non-eligible worker, and (2) that the change would not

21 For  an  individual  experiencing  two  job  separation  episodes,  the  same
individual fixed effect is used for all observations across both layoff events.

22 While  we  are  unable  to  test  whether  these  conditions  hold,  it  is  not
immediately  clear  why  industry  representation  in  our  car  registration  data
would be correlated with such industry-level differences.

9 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 2
Observable characteristics at the time of layoffs.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions when modifying Eq. (1) to exclude all interaction terms involving 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 . This table examines a potential change in characteristics
of laid-off workers following Uber’s entry into an area. The sample is made up of one observation per laid-off worker, measuring the worker’s characteristics for the month prior
to layoff. Reported standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by zip code of the worker’s residency.
Panel A: Car age sample

Eligible × Uber

Car age FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Broad sample

Eligible × Uber

Car age FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Credit
score

−0.127
(1.355)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.094

Credit
score

0.097
(1.719)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.091

Debt ($)
Total

263.185
(1191.528)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.115

Debt ($)
Total

481.823
(977.841)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.098

Credit
card

78.612
(74.270)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.074

Credit
card

29.575
(51.219)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.051

Home
loans

645.748
(1046.986)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.15

Home
loans

566.958
(1089.744)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.096

Past delinquencies (%)
Total

Credit
card

0.188
(0.344)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.065

0.177
(0.220)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.052

Past delinquencies (%)
Total

Credit
card

0.113
(0.589)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.039

0.098
(0.172)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.027

Home
loans

0.115
(0.194)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.041

Home
loans

0.028
(0.111)

Yes
Yes
263,591
0.022

be present during employment and only materialize post separation.
Before  continuing,  we  discuss  several  aspects  of  this  identifying  as-
sumption. Section 4.3 presents additional results that support of this
identifying assumption.

One plausible concern is that Uber’s entry might change incentives
to continue working for eligible workers relative to non-eligible work-
ers (as defined by either empirical strategy). While more relevant if
studying all job separations, rather than our focus on layoffs, we briefly
explore this possibility in case layoffs are being misclassified. Using our
sample of job separations, we construct the likelihood of a worker being
laid off in a given quarter.

Using this panel, Figure OA.5 explores a potential change in the
likelihood of being laid off for eligible vs. non-eligible workers. The
figure  focuses  on  our  narrow  car  age  sample,  contrasting  the  layoff
probability  for  owners  of  eligible  cars  relative  to  non-eligible  cars.
The  figure  reports  coefficients  from  a  modified  version  of  Eq.  (1)
where we regress an indicator for being laid-off on the interaction of
𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟 and a vector of event time dummies corresponding to
Uber’s entry into a market. Figure OA.6 repeats the previous approach
for  our  broad  sample,  instead  estimating  the  change  in  the  layoff
probability for car owners relative to non-owners. Overall, these results
do not depict a noticeable change in the relative likelihood of layoff for
eligible workers around Uber’s entry.

In broader terms, one challenge to our identification strategy is that
Uber’s  entry  coincides  with  a  shift  in  the type of  worker  being  laid
off. Specifically, if such differences are correlated with either outright
ownership  or  owning  a  newer  versus  older  vehicle,  this  might  bias
our  estimator.  To  evaluate  this  concern,  we  consider  the  change  in
observable characteristics (e.g., credit score) for eligible vs. noneligible
workers  around  Uber’s  entry.  For  each  layoff  event,  we  collect  the
set of worker characteristics in the month prior to job separation. We
begin by considering a potential change in worker characteristics in our
car age sample of younger versus older owners. As we now have one
observation per layoff event, we modify Eq. (1) to exclude all terms
containing 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 as  well  as  the  individual  fixed  effect,  while  still
including CBSA-month fixed effects. This yields a traditional difference-
in-difference  specification  for  eligible  versus  noneligible  car  owners,
pre- and post-Uber (defined using the layoff month for each worker).

Panel A of Table 2 presents the results for the industry re-weighted sam-
ple. Following Uber’s entry, there is no statistically significant change
in credit score (Column 1), amount of debt outstanding (Columns 2
through 4), or delinquency rates (Columns 5 through 7), inconsistent
with a differential change in observable characteristics following Uber’s
entry into an area.

Panel  B  of Table  2 repeats  the  previous  approach  on  our  broad
sample, yielding similar inferences when testing for a change in car
owner characteristics relative to non-owners following Uber’s entry into
a market.23

4.  Main results

Does  the  introduction  of  the  gig  economy  into  an  area  ease  la-
bor market frictions, reducing one’s need to offset lost wage income
with other sources? We begin by examining each outcome of interest
through the lens of our primary empirical strategy.

4.1.  Primary results

We  begin  by  studying  the  effect  of  the  gig  economy  on  credit
utilization. While the ability of an individual to increase her household
leverage  allows  her  to  smooth  consumption  during  downturns,  this
option is not costless. The limited-liability nature of consumer credit
may  lead  to  increased  dead-weight  costs  due  to  moral  hazard.  For
instance, Bernstein (2021)  documents  a  reduction  in  labor  supplied
by households experiencing debt overhang, while Mian et al. (2013)
connect pre-financial crisis household leverage increases with slower
recovery rates. In contrast, it may be possible to reduce such costs in a
counterfactual where the gig economy reduces labor market frictions.
Panel A of Table 3 estimates OLS regressions (Eq. (1)) with industry
weights  described  in  Section 3.4,  where  the  outcome  is  outstanding
credit balances. Standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered
at the zip code of the worker’s residence. In the first specification, we

23 Table OA.2 reports unweighted variants, producing similar inferences to
their weighted counterparts.

10 

V. Fos et al.

Table 3
Effects on credit outcomes.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the form described in Eq. (1). Panel
A examines the outstanding balance on credit lines, while Panel B examines the number
of open lines of credit for an individual. All other variables are described in Table 3.
Reported standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by
zip code of the worker’s residency.
Panel A: Effect on account balances

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Total debt
−689.079***
(254.075)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.896

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Effect on number of open accounts
All accounts
−0.088***
(0.027)

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.928

Credit card
−42.381*
(24.266)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.864

Credit card
−0.027***
(0.010)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.924

Home loans
−449.865**
(219.425)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.888

Home loans
−0.012***
(0.004)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.930

consider  the  effect  on  all  credit  types.  The  coefficient  on  the  triple
interaction term indicates that following Uber’s entry, the post-layoff
change  in  credit  balances  declines  by  $689  for  eligible  car  owners
relative  to  noneligible  car  owners.  This  represents  a  0.9%  decrease
relative to the average debt balance following layoff ($689 / $79,632).
Interestingly,  when  we  consider  each  type  of  credit  separately,  the
effect size is somewhat similar in a relative sense, but differs dramati-
cally from a nominal standpoint. Outstanding credit card balances fall
by $42.4 (1.25% of the post-layoff mean), while home loan balances
(mortgages, home equity loans, and HELOCs) drop by $450 (0.83% of
the post-layoff mean).

Panel  B  of Table  3 turns  to  the  change  in  the  number  of  open
accounts. Results are consistent with the previous panel, with eligible
car owners experiencing a decrease in credit lines relative to noneligible
car owners following Uber’s entry into an area.24

As a whole, the results presented in Table 3 suggest that eligible
car owners are less likely to tap into credit reserves following job loss
when Uber operates in the area. At a superficial level, this is benefi-
cial for households, helping newly laid-off workers avoid a generally
expensive  means  of  smoothing  consumption.  More  importantly,  this
decreased reliance on household leverage may also have implications
for the propagation of shocks through the local economy. Decreased
consumer credit usage may reduce economic fragility (Mian and Sufi,
2011, 2014)  or  attenuate  the  disincentive  to  work  caused  by  debt
overhang (Bernstein, 2021). Interestingly, the reduction in home loan
related balances is consistent with eligible laid-off workers being less

24 Table OA.3 repeats the previous specifications in the unweighted sample,
with quantitatively similar results. Table OA.4 demonstrates the robustness
of  our  primary  results  to  an  alternate  choice  of  clustering.  Results  remain
statistically significant, with the exception of mortgage-related delinquencies,
when  clustering  standard  errors  at  the  CBSA  level.  Finally,  Figure  OA.7
contrasts  our  results  against  those  of  a  placebo  test  where  we  repeat  our
specifications when randomizing Uber entry dates across CBSAs. Coefficients
using  true  entry  dates  fall  far  from  those  when  randomizing  Uber  entry,
alleviating concerns of model mis-specification.

11 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 4
Effects on delinquency rates.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the form described in Eq. (1). All
outcomes are indicator variables that take on a value of one if a worker is delinquent
on a line of credit of the specified type. All other variables are described in Table 3.
Reported standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by
zip code of the worker’s residency.

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Any delinquency
−0.765**
(0.313)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.546

Credit card
−0.583**
(0.238)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.532

Home loans
−0.030**
(0.014)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.473

likely to either extract housing equity for liquidity reasons (Chen et al.,
2020), or miss mortgage payments in response to job loss (Herkenhoff
and Ohanian, 2012). Related to this second possibility, we now seek
evidence  of  a  more  direct  channel  through  which  Uber’s  entry  may
affect local economic conditions: credit delinquency rates.

Table 4 estimates industry re-weighted OLS regressions where the
outcome is a 90+ day credit delinquency. The first specification con-
siders the probability of being delinquent on any line of credit. The
coefficient suggests that Uber’s entry reduces the change in delinquency
rates  for  eligible  car  owners  by  0.77  percentage  points,  or  4.9%  of
the mean delinquency rate following job loss (15.46%). Note, similar
to Barrios et al. (2020), as we are unable to observe participation rates
on  the  ride-sharing  platform,  this  represents  an  unconditional  effect
across all individuals with an eligible vehicle. This raises the question
as to what share of workers necessarily drive for Uber following job
loss to reconcile our results. As a baseline, the pre-Uber increase in
delinquency  following  job  loss  is  2.7pp.  Assuming  all  workers  face
an equal probability of driving for Uber, our point estimate implies
a 28% participation rate (0.77pp/2.7pp). Importantly, our results are
driven by marginal cases where a laid-off worker otherwise unable to
make minimum interest payments are able to by participating on the
platform. As such, this certainly represents an upper bound on implied
participation  as  platform  participation  is  likely  positively  correlated
with inability to make payments otherwise. For example, a worker with
access to pre-cautionary savings or an alternate income stream (perhaps
via a spouse) is less likely to become delinquent while arguably also less
likely to drive on the platform. Similar logic applies to workers with
an ex-ante greater likelihood of being quickly reemployed. In the other
extreme, if only workers otherwise unable to make minimum interest
payments (marginal cases) consider driving for Uber, then our results
imply a participation rate of 0.77pp.

We find a similar sized nominal effect for credit card performance of
−0.58 percentage points. However, as credit cards exhibit a lower post-
layoff  likelihood  of  being  delinquent  (8.08%),  this  effect  constitutes
a relative decrease of 7.2%. In the final specification, we turn to the
effect on mortgage delinquency rates. Relative to the post-layoff prob-
ability of mortgage delinquency (2.66%), the 3 basis point reduction in
delinquencies represents a relative decrease of 1.13%.25

While Table 3 focuses on an individual’s decision to lean on existing
or new credit lines, this is not the only means by which a household
may smooth consumption during unemployment spells. Alternatively,
an individual may apply for UI benefits to mitigate the effects of a wage

25 Table OA.5 repeats the previous specifications in the unweighted sample,
with  results  relatively  unchanged.  Our  results  are  also  robust  to  alternate
definitions of delinquency (30+ & 60+ days late).

V. Fos et al.

Table 5
Effects on UI participation.
This  table  reports  the  results  of  OLS  regressions  of  the  form  described  in  Eq.  (1).
1(𝑅𝑒𝑐 𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑑 𝐵 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑓 𝑖𝑡) is an indicator variable which takes on a value of one if an indi-
vidual receives a non-zero amount of UI benefits in a given month, while 𝐵 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑓 𝑖𝑡𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡
is the dollar amount of benefits received. All other variables are described in Table 3.
Reported standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by
zip code of the worker’s residency.

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

1(Received benefit)
−0.296*
(0.174)

Benefit amount
−1.467***
(0.444)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.295

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6,532,733
0.281

shock suffered from job loss. To this end, Table 5 presents industry re-
weighted results on UI take-up rates.26 The first specification examines
the differential effect on the extensive margin, where the dependent
variable (Benefit Received) is an indicator variable that takes a value
of one if an individual receives UI benefits in a given month, scaled
by 100 for ease of interpretation. The coefficient of −0.296, significant
at the 10% level, indicates that the monthly likelihood of an eligible
car owner receiving UI benefits (relative to a noneligible car owner)
following  job  loss  decreases  by  30  basis  points  when  Uber  operates
in the individual’s CBSA. This represents a 3.3% relative decrease in
the  post-layoff  probability  of  receiving  benefits  (0.296%  /  8.92%).
Recall, our data do not allow us to perfectly identify workers meeting
state UI eligibility requirements. While job loss descriptions allow us
to  reasonably  identify  a  separation  through  no  fault  of  the  worker,
we cannot ensure that the worker meets minimum wage or length of
employment requirements prior to job loss. While this adds noise to
the outcome of interest, it does not bias towards finding a significant
effect unless UI eligibility systematically varies for eligible car owners
relative to noneligible car owners in a way that changed after Uber’s
entry.27

To estimate the possible reduction in government expenditures, we
next  consider  the  effect  of  Uber  on  the  monthly  dollar  amount  of
UI  disbursements.  The  coefficient  of −1.467,  statistically  significant
at  the  1%  level,  indicates  that  an  eligible  car  owner  receives  $1.47
less per month following Uber’s introduction into an area relative to
a noneligible car owner. It is important to note that this corresponds
to the unconditional effect across all individuals, regardless of if they
apply for UI benefits, rather than the intensive margin of UI usage. This
coefficient represents a 4.1% relative decrease in the sample average UI
usage for eligible car owners following layoff (−1.467/−35.86).28 The
Department of Labor projects total benefits paid in 2018 to be $28.8B.29

26 Table OA.6 reports the unweighted results.
27 An  individual  who  participates  on  the  platform  is  required  by  law  to
report  any  earned  income  to  the  state  unemployment  insurance  agency.
However, because independent contractors receive a Form 1099 rather than
a Form W-2, it is unlikely that a state UI agency is able to verify a worker’s
contemporaneous gig economy income while applying for UI benefits. For this
reason, while failing to report earned income is generally considered fraud, we
cannot rule out the possibility that some individuals participate on the ride-
sharing platform, earn supplement income that is not reported to authorities,
and still file a claim for UI benefits. At the same time, this possibility will
result in a downward-bias in the estimated effect on UI take-up rates.
28 While this value may seem low, it is important to note that it does not
condition on applying for UI benefits. It also incorporates workers who receive
zero dollars in UI benefits, which make up the majority of our sample.
29 https://goo.gl/hghbCB

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

In  a  back-of-the-envelope  calculation,  a  4.1%  reduction  in  total  UI
benefits  paid  out  across  all  car  owners  equates  to  an  approximate
savings of $0.78B per year.30

Before  continuing,  it  is  important  to  note  that  our  results  are  a
function of current platform participation rates among laid-off workers.
In a counterfactual where all eligible laid-off workers turned to ride-
sharing, the increased labor supply would lead to lower earned wages
for all participants. Yet, ride-sharing represents one of many possible
gig-based  employment  opportunities  a  recent  job  loser  may  turn  to,
attenuating  such  labor  supply  effects.  Ultimately,  as  we  are  unable
to  observe  such  a  counter-factual,  this  caveat  should  be  taken  into
consideration when attempting to extrapolate beyond our setting.

4.2.  Graphical evidence

Next, we examine the time series dynamics in event time around a
worker’s job separation. To do this, we first construct a vector of 25
indicator variables that map to the 25 months around the layoff event,
spanning −12 to 12. Next, we modify Eq. (1) by replacing the indicator
for being laid off with this set of event-time indicator variables. We
omit the observation one month prior to separation as the baseline.
Our focus is on the triple interaction of 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟, 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟, and the
vector of event-time dummies.

Fig. 3 presents the results from this approach, with Panel A consid-
ering the effect on total debt outstanding. The figure depicts a gap in
the post-Uber difference in outstanding debt for eligible versus non-
eligible  car  owners,  realized  in  the  month  following  job  loss  before
stabilizing, at which point eligible car owners have a relative decrease
in outstanding balances of slightly less than $1k. Reassuringly, we find
no evidence of a differential trend in the two series prior to job loss.
Panel  B  considers  a  worker’s  delinquency  on  any  credit  obligation.
While there is no relative difference in delinquencies prior to job loss,
following Uber’s entry into a market, eligible car owners experience
lower delinquency rates relative to noneligible car owners, with the gap
widening with the time since being laid off. Given its role in the recent
financial crisis, Panel C exclusively considers the delinquency rate of
home mortgages, with results that resemble those of the previous panel.
In the final pair of panels we examine the change in UI benefits.
Panel D focuses on the likelihood that an individual receives UI benefits
in  a  given  month.  Following  Uber’s  entry,  eligible  car  owners  are
approximately 3.5 percentage points less likely to receive UI benefits
relative to their noneligible counterparts in the month they suffer a job
loss. This difference persists for approximately six months (correspond-
ing to the maximum duration of UI benefits for the vast majority of
states), before starting to converge back to zero. Importantly, the fact
that the coefficient remains negative in later months suggests that the
introduction of Uber does not simply postpone a household’s take-up
of UI. Panel E presents consistent results when considering the dollar
amount of benefits received per month.31

4.3.  Pre-existing trends, car age variation, & dynamic diff-in-diff

The  results  so  far  are  consistent  with  the  gig  economy  impact-
ing household behavior following job loss. This subsection considers
potential concerns with our approach.

We begin with the possibility that an alternative force is at play.
Here, the most likely candidate is endogenous entry, where Uber strate-
gically  enters  markets  currently  experiencing  economic  growth  that
disproportionately benefits eligible car owners relative to noneligible

30 Here, we assume a car ownership rate of 88% (Pew 2015), and an eligible
ownership rate of 75% conditional on car ownership (derived from our data),
yielding $28.8𝐵 × 0.88 × 0.75 × 0.041.
31 unweighted variants for each panel are reports in Figure OA.8.

12 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Fig. 3. Changes in outcomes around job separations.
This figure reports the difference in outcome variables for eligible car owners relative to non-eligible owners around job separation. The figure is based on a modified version
of Eq. (1), where the indicator for being laid off is replaced with a vector of dummies corresponding to event-time (in months) around being laid off. The figure reports coefficients
of the triple interaction of 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟, 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟, and the event-time dummies, with corresponding 95% confidence bands. Outcomes include the outstanding credit balance (Panel
A), overall credit delinquency rate (Panel B), mortgage credit delinquency rate (Panel C), monthly probability of receiving UI benefits (Panel D), and dollar amount of benefits
received (Panel E).

owners. In other words, Uber’s entry may coincide with the realiza-
tion of a pre-existing, time-varying factor that differentially affects an
eligible car owner’s reemployment prospects relative to a noneligible
car owner. Given the likely planning needed to enter a new market, if
this alternative is at work, then one would expect that the difference
in post-layoff outcomes between eligible and noneligible car owners
would  manifest  in  the  time  leading  up  to  Uber’s  entry.  To  examine
this possible pre-existing effect, we modify Eq. (1) by replacing 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟 in

the triple interaction with a vector of indicator variables, 𝑟𝑒𝑙 𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐸 𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦,
corresponding to event time with respect to Uber’s entry into market 𝑗:

𝑦𝑖𝑗 𝑡 =

8
∑

𝑘=−8

𝜂𝑘 × 1(𝑟𝑒𝑙 𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐸 𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑗 = 𝑘) × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗 + 𝛽𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡

+ 𝛿𝑗 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑗 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝜙𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗 𝑡,

(3)

13 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 6
Excluding quick re-employments.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions excluding workers who find re-employment within 1-month in Panel A and 3-months in Panel B. All outcome variables are
described in Tables 3, 4, and 5. Reported standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by zip code of the worker’s residency.
Panel A: Excluding re-employments within 1-month

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Total
debt

−706.391***
(277.141)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Excluding re-employments within 3-months

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5,618,151
0.912

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations

***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Total
debt

−687.414***
(289.433)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,134,222
0.896

Home
loans

−472.647**
(208.127)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5,618,151
0.901

Home
loans

−463.113**
(212.983)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,134,222
0.891

where 𝑘 = 0 is the quarter that Uber first enters a market. Note, we
assign any time occurring outside of the 16-quarter period surrounding
Uber’s  entry  into  the  corresponding  ‘bookend’  event  time  dummies.
Thus, the vector of 𝜂s allows us to estimate a separate coefficient of
𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 × 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒 in event time around Uber’s entry into a CBSA.

Panel A of Fig. 4 illustrates the estimation results when the outcome
is credit balances. The figure reports the estimated coefficients, with
corresponding  95%  confidence  bands.  The  estimation  results  do  not
support the alternative hypothesis of a pre-existing trend prior to Uber’s
entry into a market. In contrast, the point estimate on 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 ×𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒
is stable and indistinguishable from the base case (𝑡 − 1) before Uber
first  enters  a  market.  Moreover,  while  there  is  a  small  decrease  in
the point estimate in the quarter following Uber’s entry, within two
quarters eligible car owners exhibit a greater post-layoff decrease in
credit usage relative to noneligible car owners. Panels B and C present
similar results for post-layoff delinquency rates in all lines of credit and
mortgage delinquencies. Finally, we find no evidence of pre-existing
trends when examining the effect on UI benefits (Panels D and E).32
Taken  together,  the  results  in Fig.  4 are  inconsistent  with  a  time-
varying omitted variable correlated with Uber’s entry influencing the
post-layoff behavior of eligible versus noneligible car owners.

While  industry  re-weighting  our  sample  drastically  reduces  the
discrepancy in the average UI participation rate, our sample still falls
on the low-end of UI participation observed in the CPS DW supplement.
One explanation for this difference is the potential misclassification of
some  job  displacements,  where  a  worker  voluntarily  separated  after
securing a more preferable job. However, this possibility is made less
likely  by  the  use  of  employer  provided  job  separation  descriptions.
Employers have strong incentives to delineate job separations correctly.
Classifying a voluntary separation as a layoff can increase an employers’
UI tax as it allows workers to become eligible for UI. Nevertheless, we
now consider the extent to which our results are affected by the possible
inclusion of Job-to-Job transitions.

32 Figure OA.9 reports analogous results for the unweighted sample, to the
same effect.

14 

Any
delinquency

−0.781***
(0.309)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5,618,151
0.583

Any
delinquency

−0.769**
(0.328)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,134,222
0.573

Home
delinquency

−0.026**
(0.013)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5,618,151
0.501

Home
delinquency

−0.028*
(0.015)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,134,222
0.486

1(Received
benefit)

−0.327**
(0.155)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5,618,151
0.326

1(Received
benefit)

−0.294*
(0.161)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,134,222
0.311

Benefit
amount

−1.784***
(0.392)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5,618,151
0.309

Benefit
amount

−1.750***
(0.413)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,134,222
0.294

Table 6 considers this concern, excluding workers quickly finding
reemployment. Panel A repeats our primary analysis when excluding
workers which we observe being reemployed within 1 month by an-
other firm in our sample. The effect of Uber’s entry on credit balances,
delinquencies, and UI participation are quantitatively similar following
the removal of quickly reemployed workers. Panel B of the table ex-
tends this analysis, further restricting the sample by excluding workers
where we observe reemployment within 3 months. Results are virtually
unchanged following this sample restriction, alleviating concerns that
our results are being materially affected by the misclassification of some
Job-to-Job transitions.

Next,  we  consider  a  related  concern  where  post-layoff  responses
instead  vary  with  wealth,  and  car  eligibility  is  simply  serving  as  a
proxy. While such heterogeneity would need to be time-varying given
the inclusion of layoff-car age fixed effects and vary differentially across
Uber and non-Uber areas, we take this alternative seriously. We modify
our estimating equation by replacing 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟 with the vector of
car age indicators, yielding:

𝑦𝑖𝑗 𝑡 =

20
∑

𝑘=10

𝜂𝑘 × 1(𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 = 𝑘) × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 + 𝛽𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡

+ 𝛿𝑗 × 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑖𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑗 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡 × 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝐴𝑔 𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝜙𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗 𝑡

(4)

In doing so, the vector of 𝜂 coefficients estimates the differential effect
of Uber’s entry on post-layoff responses across different car ages. If Uber
is providing short-term labor opportunities to the newly unemployed,
one  would  expect  to  see  a  discrete  jump  in  coefficients  around  the
15-year  car  age  threshold.  Alternatively,  if  car  age  is  picking  up  a
time-varying heterogeneous effect of wealth, one would expect to see
a continuous change across car ages.

Panel A of Fig. 5 plots the coefficients of the vector of car ages inter-
acted with 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟 when the outcome is the total outstanding
balance, with two patterns emerging. First, the effect of Uber’s entry
is quite stable for individuals with cars between 10 and 15 years old.
Second, there is a discrete increase at the eligibility threshold, with

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Fig. 4. Changes in outcomes around Uber’s entry.
This figure reports the estimated effect of 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 × 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒 on outcome variables in the time around Uber’s entry into a market. We define the month that Uber first entered
CBSA 𝑗 by 𝑈𝑗 . Following this, we remove the indicator variable 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑗 𝑡, denoting Uber’s presence in CBSA 𝑗 as of month 𝑡 from Eq. (1). In its place, we include a vector of 17
indicator variables that correspond to the event time around Uber’s entry (in quarters), ranging from 𝑈𝑗 − 8 to 𝑈𝑗 + 8. We assign any month occurring prior to 𝑈𝑗 − 8, and any
month subsequent to 𝑈𝑗 + 8, to their respective ‘‘book-end’’ event time fixed effects. The figure also reports 95% confidence bands. Outcomes include the outstanding credit balance
(Panel A), overall credit delinquency rate (Panel B), mortgage credit delinquency rate (Panel C), monthly probability of receiving UI benefits (Panel D), and dollar amount of
benefits received (Panel E).

15 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 7
Stacked approach.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions using a stacked approach. All outcome variables are described in Tables 3, 4, and 5. Reported standard errors in parentheses are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by zip code of the worker’s residency.
Panel A: Credit usage and delinquency rates

Account balances
Total
debt

−970.123**
(439.529)

17,362,555
0.929

Credit
card

−38.896*
(20.510)

17,362,555
0.908

Home
loans

−675.924*
(398.509)

17,362,555
0.921

1(Received
benefit)

−0.291*
(0.159)

17,362,555
0.312

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Observations
R-squared
Panel B: UI participation

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Delinquency rates
Any
delinquency

−1.017***
(0.349)

17,362,555
0.589

Credit
Card

−0.762***
(0.261)

17,362,555
0.570

Home
loans

−0.107*
(0.058)

17,362,555
0.518

Benefit
amount

−1.443**
(0.721)

17,362,555
0.296

coefficients statistically indistinguishable from the base case for cars
16+ years of age.

Turning  to  credit  delinquency  rates,  we  see  similar  patterns  for
overall delinquency rates (Panel B), and housing-related delinquencies
(Panel C). Finally, we see similar patterns when considering UI recipi-
ency rates (Panel D), or the dollar amount of benefits received (Panel
E).33 Overall, the results in Fig. 5 are inconsistent with a heterogeneous
post-layoff response with respect to an omitted variable correlated with
car eligibility (e.g., wealth).

Finally, recent literature has raised concerns over the use of panel
regressions as difference-in-difference estimators (e.g., Goodman-Bacon,
2021). Baker et al. (2022) notes the core issue is that the previously-
treated observations (CBSAs where Uber entered early) serve as con-
trols for later-to-be-treated areas (CBSAs where Uber entered later).

We briefly examine the sensitivity of our analysis to this concern
using the stacked regression approach implemented in Gormley and
Matsa (2011)  and Cengiz  et  al. (2019),  among  others.  Intuitively,
CBSAs are first binned into ‘‘cohorts’’ based on a common treatment
date (e.g., Uber entry in 2014Q2). For each cohort, all observations
in  the  treated  CBSAs  are  retained  for  a  window  around  treatment
(e.g.,  8  quarters).  This  cohort  is  then  matched  to  a  set  of  control
observations in other CBSAs over the same window where Uber has
not yet entered. The result is a cohort-specific sample of treated and
control observations, which are assigned a cohort-specific ID. Finally,
the  cohort-specific  samples  are  appended  together  to  form  a  final
‘‘stacked’’ dataset.34 Using this stacked dataset, our previous regressions
are estimated when including as additional controls the interaction of
the cohort ID and (a) time fixed effects, and (b) individual fixed effects.
Table  7 estimates  our  main  results  using  this  stacked  regression
approach when considering an 8-quarter window around Uber’s entry
into a CBSAs and defining cohorts by the quarter of entry. Panel A
considers  the  effect  of  Uber’s  entry  on  post-layoff  credit  usage  and
delinquencies. Results are consistent with those of Tables 3 and 4, with
marginally larger coefficients in most specifications. Panel B turns to

33 Figure OA.10 reports the point estimates from unweighted regressions.
34 Note, a given observation may serve as a control in multiple cohorts, while
also being a treated observation in a (later to be treated) cohort. To account
for the repetition of observations, standard errors are clustered at a level that
encompasses all versions of a given observation (e.g., zip code level).

UI-related outcomes, finding virtually identical results to the analogous
Table 5.35

Overall,  the  results  in  this  subsection  address  concerns  that  our
empirical approach is picking up an endogenous effect related to Uber’s
entry or an omitted variable correlated with owning an eligible car,
while also assuaging concerns that our panel regression approach suf-
fers from the dynamic treatment effect concern recently raised in the
literature.

5.  Economic mechanism

The  results  in  Section 4 support  the  conjecture  that  workers  use
Uber as a substitute for credit usage and UI following job loss. Specif-
ically, individuals most readily able to participate on the ride-sharing
platform draw down untapped credit lines less, are less likely to expe-
rience a delinquency, and receive relatively fewer UI benefits.

Yet, the previous tests are silent on the economic mechanism driv-
ing  these  outcomes.  While  they  do  not  make  up  the  entire  set  of
possibilities,  two  channels  stand  out  as  chief  candidates  to  explain
our  results.  First,  workers  may  view  Uber  as  a  short-term  response
to  job  loss,  providing  easily  accessible  short-term  jobs.  Importantly,
this  mechanism  represents  a  structural  shift  in  labor  markets  likely
to benefit a broad set of laid-off workers for an extended period of
time  following  Uber’s  entry.  Accordingly,  this  channel  suggests  that
the effects described in Section 4 should persist over time, consistent
with Fig. 4. Alternatively, Uber may simply increase the supply of long-
term employment prospects, much in the same way a large generic firm
would upon entry into an area.

We now consider a collection of tests motivated by the argument
that recently laid-off workers are likely to view the platform as a tem-
porary solution to be used while pursuing superior long-term prospects
in the traditional labor market, rather than as a permanent form of
reemployment. In line with this argument, Hall and Krueger (2018)
find that ‘‘earning money while looking for a steady, full-time job’’ is a
major reason for participating on the platform for 32% of Uber drivers.
This idea is also consistent with labor market episodes in which the
gig economy garnered the attention of media and lawmakers in the
wake of recent government shutdowns. The household errand platform
TaskRabbit saw a spike in participation with 13k+ applications in one
day (Little, 2013) during the October 2013 shutdown. More recently,

35 Table OA.7 reports the results for the unweighted sample.

16 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Fig. 5. Changes in outcomes around Uber’s entry by car age.
This figure reports the estimated effect of 𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑓 𝑓 × 𝑈 𝑏𝑒𝑟 on outcome variables for owners of cars with different ages. Here, we remove the indicator variable 𝐸 𝑙 𝑖𝑔 𝑖𝑏𝑙 𝑒𝑂 𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟
from Eq. (1). In its place, we include a vector of 11 indicator variables that correspond to the age of the car, ranging from 10 through 20. The figure also reports 95% confidence
bands. Outcomes include the outstanding credit balance (Panel A), overall credit delinquency rate (Panel B), mortgage credit delinquency rate (Panel C), monthly probability of
receiving UI benefits (Panel D), and dollar amount of benefits received (Panel E).

17 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 8
Re-employed within 12 months.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the form described in Eq. (1). The sample is restricted to individuals obtaining a new job at a firm in our sample within 12
months of the initial job loss. All outcome variables are described in Tables 3, 4, and 5. Reported standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by zip
code of the worker’s residency.

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Total
debt

−652.840***
(271.258)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,498,576
0.896

Home
loans

−581.359*
(298.035)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,498,576
0.888

Any
delinquency

−0.289***
(0.106)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,498,576
0.550

Home
delinquency

0.115
(0.213)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,498,576
0.474

1(Received
benefit)

−0.204*
(0.109)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,498,576
0.301

Benefit
amount

−0.640*
(0.360)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,498,576
0.278

law makers and union representatives expressed concern that critical
federal employees, such as air traffic controllers, were moonlighting
on ride-sharing platforms during the January 2019 shutdown (Halsey
and Aratani, 2019). Such workers are arguably not likely to view the
gig  economy  as  a  permanent  employment  prospect  taken  in  lieu  of
traditional  employment.  Instead,  these  accounts  are  consistent  with
the  gig-economy  providing  easily  available  short-term  employment
following an income shock, changing the structure of labor markets
rather than merely producing additional ubiquitous jobs.

Historical accounts notwithstanding, we now seek evidence to sup-
port our conjecture. First, to ensure that the previous results are not
being driven by individuals who are permanently exiting the traditional
workforce,  we  restrict  our  sample  to  the  set  of  workers  which  we
observe being reemployed within 12 months of layoff by another firm
in our employment data set. This subsample consists of slightly more
than 135k workers.36

Table  8 repeats  the  analysis  from  Section 4 using  this  restricted
sample. Effects of Uber’s entry remain economically and statistically
significant,  with  the  exception  of  home  delinquencies.  While  point
estimates are generally smaller in magnitude relative to our baseline
analysis, this is consistent with a reduced hardship for an individual
able to more quickly find re-employment, and thus a smaller potential
benefit of the gig economy.

Next, we consider a second subset of the population that is less likely
to  view  the  ride-sharing  platform  as  a  long-term  solution  to  unem-
ployment. Using ZIP code level income statistics from the SOI division
of  the  IRS,  we  restrict  the  sample  to  individuals  residing  in  above-
median income ZIP codes. Table OA.8 repeats the previous analysis on
this subsample, where the average income is $134k, yielding similar
inferences  to Table  8.37 Overall,  these  results  are  consistent  with  a
reduction in labor market frictions for a group of individuals not likely
to view Uber as a feasible long-term alternative.

The distinction between the ride-sharing platform as a short- and
long-term employment prospect also offers another testable prediction.
Treatment as a short-term means of buffering an income shock suggests

36 Note,  we  are  unable  to  observe  reemployment  in  instances  where  the
individual receives a new job at a firm that does not subscribe to Equifax’s
employment and income verification services. Thus, the excluded sample also
includes  workers  that  find  reemployment  within  12  months  at  noncovered
firms. For this reason, inferring reemployment rates from the change in sample
size understates the likelihood that a worker finds traditional reemployment
within 12 months.
37 Table OA.9 and Table OA.10 report results for workers reemployed within
12  months  and  high-income  workers,  respectively,  using  the  unweighted
sample.

a laid off worker is substituting away from other short-term options
(e.g., claiming UI). Here, we would expect a laid-off worker to evaluate
ride-sharing participation against her outside options, which includes
UI benefits. In contrast, if the recently laid-off view Uber as a long-term
job, variation in temporary benefits provided by UI should not affect a
worker’s decision to participate on the platform.

We use this trade-off as motivation for a test that exploits differences
in the maximum amount of weekly UI benefits paid out across states.
If laid-off workers view the ride-sharing platform as a substitute for
income provided by UI, a worker is likely to choose Uber more often
when  expected  UI  benefits  are  lower.  This  implies  that  the  effects
we  document  above  should  be  stronger  when  UI  benefits  are  less
generous. Overall, our sample exhibits a considerable amount of state-
level variation in benefit caps. For instance, as of January 2014, the
maximum amount of weekly UI benefits provided in Massachusetts was
$679, compared to $235 offered in Mississippi.

Table 9 presents the results, where Panel A evaluates the effects
on  credit  usage.  When  examining  the  relative  change  in  total  debt
outstanding  (columns  1  and  3)  and  mortgage  related  debt  balances
(columns 2 and 4), point estimates are statistically significant in states
with below-median maximum UI benefits. In contrast, point estimates
are statistically insignificant in states with more generous UI limits.

Panel B of Table 9 turns to heterogeneity in the effect on credit
delinquencies,  with  point  estimates  implying  statistically  significant
effects of Uber’s entry on overall delinquency rates in the subsample
of states with a smaller expected benefit. In contrast, we do not find a
statistically significant effect on mortgage delinquency rates in either
subsample.  Finally,  Panel  C  examines  UI  participation  rates.  While
eligible car owners demonstrate a statistically significant decrease in
take-up rates relative to noneligible car owners in low generosity states,
point estimates are again insignificant in high generosity states.38

Taken together, the results in this section are consistent with gig
labor changing the structure of labor markets, increasing the liquidity
provided by short-term jobs rather than simply increasing the supply
of generic long-term jobs.

6.  External validity

Our primary identification strategy allows us to exploit differential
responses  to  Uber  entry  among  individuals  with  access  to  a  vehicle

38 Formal test indicates a difference in coefficients across the two subsamples
that  is  statistically  significant  near  traditional  levels  for  credit  usage  and
delinquency outcomes, with 𝑝-values ranging from 0.04 to 0.11. In contrast,
we cannot rule out similar sized effects for UI outcomes from the first panel.

18 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 9
Cross-sectional effects: UI benefits.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the form described in Eq. (1). Considered are above and below median sample splits
based on the maximum amount of weekly UI benefits paid across states. The table examines the effects on outstanding credit balances (Panel
A), delinquency rates (Panel B), and UI take-up (Panel C). All independent variables are described in Table 3. Reported standard errors in
parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by zip code of the worker’s residency.
Panel A: Effect on account balances
Max UI Benefits:

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Effect on delinquency rates
Max UI Benefits:

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel C: Effect on UI Takeup
Max UI Benefits:

Layoff × Eligible × Uber

Below median
Total
debt

−1285.935***
(430.415)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,322,148
0.891

Below median
Any
delinquency

−0.755**
(0.345)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,322,148
0.550

Below median
1(Received benefit)
−0.372*
(0.198)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Layoff FE
Car age-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,322,148
0.314

Home
loans

−793.281**
(373.282)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,322,148
0.884

Home
delinquency

−0.292
(0.176)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,322,148
0.478

Benefit amount
−2.239***
(0.647)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,322,148
0.300

Above median
Total
debt

−473.847
(392.488)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,209,404
0.862

Above median
Any
delinquency

−0.612
(0.511)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,209,404
0.574

Home
loans

−347.872
(299.785)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,209,404
0.917

Home
delinquency

−0.061
(0.119)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,209,404
0.475

Above median
1(Received benefit)
−0.113
(0.241)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,209,404
0.296

Benefit amount
−0.975
(0.741)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,209,404
0.284

between 10 and 20 years old. Yet, doing so trades off better identifi-
cation by focusing on a select subset of our sample. We now briefly
present  results  from  our  broad  sample,  which  does  not  require  an
individual to be present in the car registration data. Recall, here we
infer car ownership through the existence of auto-related debt, while
our empirical strategy compares car owners to non-owners.

Table 10 re-estimates our baseline findings using this more general
sample. Panel A examines the effects on credit usage. When considering
all forms of credit in the first specification, car owner response’s exhibit
a relative decrease of roughly $839 following Uber’s entry into a local
market. The remaining specifications consider individual types of credit
with qualitatively similar, albeit slightly smaller magnitude, results to
those  in Table  3.  Panel  B  turns  to  the  effects  on  credit  delinquen-
cies.  When  considering  all  forms  of  credit  in  the  first  specification,
post-layoff delinquencies of car owners exhibit a relative decrease of
0.61pp. Benchmarked against the average post-layoff delinquency rate
of 17.91pp, this represents a 3.4% relative decrease. When distinguish-
ing between types of credit, we see that Uber’s entry impacted both
credit cards and home-related credit claims.

Panel  C  turns  to  the  second  means  by  which  an  individual  may
weather a job loss, UI benefits. In the first specification, the coefficient

of −0.36 indicates that the post-layoff monthly recipiency rate of a car
owner decreases by 36 basis points relative to a nonowner following
Uber’s  entry.  This  estimate  represents  a  4.1%  decrease  in  the  post-
layoff likelihood of receiving benefits (8.77%). The second specification
reports consistent results for the monthly dollar amount of UI benefits
received,  with  Uber’s  entry  being  associated  with  a  $7.32  average
decrease for car owners.

The previous table presents results consistent with Section 4 when
considering  a  more  general  sample  of  laid-off  workers.  Given  the
change in both sample and workers posited as being more or less able to
participate in a ride-sharing platform, we repeat the exercises designed
to validate our empirical approach, with results reported in the Online
Appendix. Specifically, we do not find a noticeable difference in the
layoff rate across the two groups (Figure OA.6) following Uber’s entry,
while Figure OA.11 shows no effect in the quarters leading up to Uber’s
entry into an area (pre-trend test).

In a final test we consider a plausible concern associated with our
broader sample, where our results are explained by a general difference
between car owners and nonowners, which manifests after Uber enters
a local market. Here, we consider two groups of individuals that have
access to a vehicle: those financing their car through a loan and those

19 

V. Fos et al.

Table 10
Evidence from broader sample.
This  table  reports  the  results  of  OLS  regressions  of  the  form  described  in  Eq.  (2).
The dependent variables considered include credit usage (Panel A), credit delinquency
rates (Panel B), and UI related outcomes (Panel C). 𝐶 𝑎𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟 is an indicator variable
which takes on a value of one if an individual has a car loan the month prior to job
separation. All other variables are defined in the previous tables. Reported standard
errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by zip code of the
worker’s residency.
Panel A: Effect on account balances

Layoff × Carowner × Uber

Total debt
−838.601***
(200.288)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Effect on delinquency rates

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.879

Layoff × Carowner × Uber

Any delinquency
−0.607***
(0.240)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel C: Effect on UI Takeup

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.595

Credit card
−17.981*
(10.376)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.714

Credit card
−0.595***
(0.170)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.612

Home loans
−253.761**
(137.196)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.890

Home loans
−0.20**
(0.082)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.503

Layoff × Carowner × Uber

1(Received benefit)
−0.359***
(0.106)

Benefit amount
−7.316***
(1.527)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.303

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,227,167
0.250

with  a  car  lease.  Intuitively,  while  both  groups  have  access  to  an
automobile,  those  who  lease  face  additional  constraints  imposed  by
usage agreements that prevent excessive vehicle use. Such restrictions
typically limit the number of miles allowed per year. These constraints
likely impair a lessee’s ability to operate on a ride-sharing platform in
any significant capacity, providing a useful placebo group.

Table 11 presents the results when bisecting car owners based on
the choice of loan versus lease. We assign all individuals from the car
owner group who do not have a car lease into the Non-leasers sub-group.
All remaining car owners are assigned to the Leasers subgroup.

Panel  A  indicates  a  statistically  significant  effect  on  total  debt
outstanding in both subsamples. In contrast, when turning to mortgage
related debt outstanding we only find a statistically significant effect of
Uber’s entry for individuals in the Non-leasers subgroup. Panel B shows
a  similar  pattern  for  delinquency  behavior,  with  larger  magnitude
point  estimates  for  individuals  without  auto  leases.  Finally,  Panel  C
shows consistent results on UI participation rates. The panel indicates a
statistically significant effect of Uber’s entry for individuals in the Non-
leasers subgroup, while point estimates are insignificant in the Leasers
subgroup.

7.  Conclusion

This paper highlights the role of the gig economy as a substitute
for credit markets and unemployment insurance during unemployment

20 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

spells.  Using  the  staggered  introduction  of  Uber  across  geographic
regions, we find that eligible car owners increase their outstanding debt
balances post job loss by 0.9% less than they otherwise would following
Uber’s entry, while delinquency rates fall by 4.9%. Moreover, eligible
car  owners  are  3.3%  less  likely  to  lean  on  UI  programs  following
job loss in areas where Uber is present. In support of our identifying
assumption, we do not find evidence of a pre-trend in which eligible car
owners’ outcomes deviate from noneligible car owners in the quarters
leading up to Uber’s entry into an area and find a stable effect of Uber’s
entry across the range of eligible car ages in conjunction with a marked
jump at the threshold determining car eligibility.

Anecdotal  evidence  from  recent  government  shutdowns  suggest
many income-shocked workers view the gig economy as a short-term
solution to buffer consumption. We find systematic evidence for this
economic channel. Our results hold when restricting the sample to laid-
off workers whom we observe as being reemployed in the traditional
workforce within 12 months of layoff, and when restricting the sample
to high-income areas, both groups which are less likely to view Uber
as a long-term job prospect. Moreover, the effects of Uber’s entry are
stronger in states with less generous UI benefits. This is consistent with
workers weighing the trade off between two short-term options, the gig
economy and UI.

Taken together, our results demonstrate the substantial role the gig
economy plays in reducing reliance on credit markets and UI following
negative income shocks.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Vyacheslav  Fos: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  origi-
nal draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources,
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisi-
tion, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Naser Hamdi:
Project administration. Ankit Kalda: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software,
Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding
acquisition,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization. Jor-
dan Nickerson: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103956.

Data availability

Replication Code for’ Gig Labor: Trading Safety Nets for Steering Whe
els’ (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Table 11
Cross-sectional effects: Auto leases.
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the form described in Eq. (2). Considered are individuals with and without auto lease
accounts. The table examines the effects on outstanding credit balances (Panel A), delinquency rates (Panel B), and UI take-up (Panel C). All
independent variables are described in Table 3. Reported standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by zip code
of the worker’s residency.
Panel A: Effect on account balances

Layoff × Carowner × Uber

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Effect on delinquency rates

Layoff × Carowner × Uber

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
Panel C: Effect on UI Takeup

Layoff × Carowner × Uber

Non-leasers

Total
debt

−969.492***
(249.392)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,464,016
0.869

Non-leasers

Any
delinquency

−0.832***
(0.284)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,945,785
0.568

Non-leasers
1(Received benefit)
−0.450***
(0.128)

Individual FE
City-Month-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Layoff FE
Carowner-City-Uber FE
Observations
R-squared
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9,164,395
0.309

References

Home
loans

−309.511*
(169.710)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,464,016
0.887

Home
delinquency

−0.061*
(0.034)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,945,785
0.495

Benefit amount
−9.127***
(2.043)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9,164,395
0.248

Leasers

Total
debt

−761.849***
(262.196)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,596,328
0.868

Leasers

Any
delinquency

−0.186
(0.295)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,714,693
0.568

Home
loans

−113.819
(201.401)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,596,328
0.887

Home
delinquency

−0.108
(0.109)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8,714,693
0.494

Leasers
1(Received benefit)
−0.254*
(0.137)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9,404,960
0.304

Benefit amount
−4.449***
(1.846)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9,404,960
0.248

Anderson,  P.M.,  Meyer,  B.D.,  1997.  Unemployment  insurance  takeup  rates  and  the

after-tax value of benefits*. Q. J. Econ. 112 (3), 913–937.

Baily, M.N., 1978. Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance. J. Public Econ.

10 (3), 379–402.

Baker, A.C., Larcker, D.F., Wang, C.C., 2022. How much should we trust staggered

difference-in-differences estimates? J. Financ. Econ. 144 (2), 370–395.

Barrios, J., Hochberg, Y., Yi, H., 2018. The cost of convenience: Ridesharing and traffic

fatalities. Working paper.

Barrios, J.M., Hochberg, Y.V., Yi, H., 2020. Launching with a parachute: The gig econ-
omy and entrepreneurial entry. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute
for Economics Working Paper 2020–21.

Baugh, B., Correia, F., 2022. Does paycheck frequency matter? Evidence from micro

data. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (3), 1026–1042.

Berger, T., Chen, C., Frey, C.B., 2018. Drivers of disruption? Estimating the Uber effect.

Bernstein, A., 2021. Negative home equity and household labor supply. J. Finance 76,

Bethune,  Z.,  2015.  Consumer  credit,  unemployment,  and  aggregate  labor  market

Braxton, J.C., Herkenhoff, K.F., Phillips, G.M., 2020. Can the Unemployed Borrow?
Implications for Public Insurance. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Buchak, G., 2018. Financing the gig economy. Working Paper.
Burtch,  G.,  Carnahan,  S.,  Greenwood,  B.N.,  2018.  Can  you  gig  it?  An  empirical
examination of the gig economy and entrepreneurial activity. Manage. Sci. 64 (12),
5497–5520.

Eur. Econ. Rev. 110, 197–210.

2963–2995.

dynamics. Working Paper.

Card, D., Chetty, R., Weber, A., 2007. The spike at benefit exhaustion: Leaving the
unemployment system or starting a new job? Amer. Econ. Rev. 97 (2), 113–118.
Cengiz, D., Dube, A., Lindner, A., Zipperer, B., 2019. The effect of minimum wages on

low-wage jobs. Q. J. Econ. 134 (3), 1405–1454.

Chen,  M.K.,  Chevalier,  J.A.,  Rossi,  P.E.,  Oehlsen,  E.,  2017.  The  Value  of  Flexible
Work: Evidence from Uber Drivers. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Chen, H., Michaux, M., Roussanov, N., 2020. Houses as ATMs: mortgage refinancing

and macroeconomic uncertainty. J. Finance 75 (1), 323–375.

Cocco, J.F., 2013. Evidence on the benefits of alternative mortgage products. J. Finance

68 (4), 1663–1690.

Cramer, J., Krueger, A.B., 2016. Disruptive change in the taxi business: The case of

Uber. Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. Proc. 106 (5), 177–182.

Diamond, P., 1990. Pairwise credit in search equilibrium. Q. J. Econ. 105, 285–319.
Donaldson,  J.R.,  Piacentino,  G.,  Thakor,  A.,  2019.  Household  debt  overhang  and

unemployment. J. Finance 74 (3), 1473–1502.

Flemming,  J.S.,  1978.  Aspects  of  optimal  unemployment  insurance:  Search,  leisure,
savings and capital market imperfections. J. Public Econ. 10 (3), 403–425.
Friedman,  M.,  1957.  The  permanent  income  hypothesis.  In:  A  Theory  of  the

Consumption Function. Princeton University Press, pp. 20–37.

Ganong, P., Noel, P., 2019. Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and

normative implications. Amer. Econ. Rev.

Gerardi, K., Herkenhoff, K.F., Ohanian, L.E., Willen, P.S., 2017. Can’t pay or won’t pay?
Unemployment, negative equity, and strategic default. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (3),
1098–1131.

Gong,  J.,  Greenwood,  B.,  Song,  Y.,  2017.  Uber  might  buy  me  a  Mercedes  Benz:
An empirical investigation of the sharing economy and durable goods purchase.
Working paper.

21 

V. Fos et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103956 

Goodman-Bacon, A., 2021. Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing.

Keynes, J.M., 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936).

J. Econometrics 225 (2), 254–277.

Gormley,  T.A.,  Matsa,  D.A.,  2011.  Growing  out  of  trouble?  Corporate  responses  to

liability risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (8), 2781–2821.

Gruber, J., 1997. The consumption smoothing benefits of unemployment insurance.

Amer. Econ. Rev. 87 (1), 192.

Kessinger Publishing.

Kolsrud,  J.,  Landais,  C.,  Nilsson,  P.,  Spinnewijn,  J.,  2018.  The  optimal  timing  of
unemployment benefits: Theory and evidence from sweden. Amer. Econ. Rev. 108
(4–5), 985–1033.

Koustas, D., 2018. Consumption insurance and multiple jobs: Evidence from rideshare

Hall, R.E., 1978. Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis:

drivers. Working Paper.

theory and evidence. J. Political Econ. 86 (6), 971–987.

Hall, J., Horton, J., Knoepfle, D., 2017. Labor market equilibration: Evidence from

Little, K., 2013. As shutdown lingers, federal workers try to make quick cash. CNBC.
Ljungqvist, L., Sargent, T.J., 1998. The European unemployment dilemma. J. Political

Hall,  J.V.,  Krueger,  A.B.,  2018.  An  analysis  of  the  labor  market  for  Uber’s

McKenna, C., McHugh, R., 2016. Share of unemployed receiving jobless aid remained

driver-partners in the United States. ILR Rev. 71 (3), 705–732.

Halsey, A., Aratani, L., 2019. Prolonged Shutdown Puts Flying Public at Risk, Officials

Meyer, B.D., 1990. Unemployment insurance and unemployment spells. Econometrica

Econ. 106 (3), 514–550.

at record low in 2015.

58 (4), 757–782.

Herkenhoff, K.F., 2019. The impact of consumer credit access on unemployment. Rev.

Mian, A., Rao, K., Sufi, A., 2013. Household balance sheets, consumption, and the

Uber. Working paper.

Warn. The Washington Post.

Econ. Stud. 86 (6), 2605–2642.

Jackson, E., 2019. Availability of the gig economy and long run labor supply effects

Ostrovsky, M., Schwarz, M., 2018. Carpooling and the economics of self-driving cars.

economic slump. Q. J. Econ. 128 (4), 1687–1726.

Mian,  A.,  Sufi,  A.,  2011.  House  prices,  home  equity-based  borrowing,  and  the  US

household leverage crisis. Amer. Econ. Rev. 101 (5), 2132–2156.

Mian, A., Sufi, A., 2014. What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment? Econo-

metrica 82 (6), 2197–2223.

Modigliani, F., Brumberg, R., 1954. Utility analysis and the consumption function: An

interpretation of cross-section data. Franco Modigliani 1, 388–436.

Morse, A., 2011. Payday lenders: Heroes or villains? J. Financ. Econ. 102 (1), 28–44.
Mortensen, D.T., 1977. Unemployment insurance and job search decisions. ILR Rev. 30

(4), 505–517.

Working paper.

Schmieder, J.F., Von Wachter, T., Bender, S., 2012. The effects of extended unemploy-
ment  insurance  over  the  business  cycle:  Evidence  from  regression  discontinuity
estimates over 20 years. Q. J. Econ. 127 (2), 701–752.

Sullivan, J.X., 2008. Borrowing during unemployment unsecured debt as a safety net.

J. Hum. Resour. 43 (2), 383–412.

Uber, 2019. Introducing xchange leasing: Lease options built for uber driver-partners.

Herkenhoff,  K.F.,  Ohanian,  L.,  2012.  Foreclosure  delay  and  US  unemployment.  In:
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series, (no. 2012–017), Citeseer.
Herkenhoff, K., Phillips, G., Cohen-Cole, E., 2016. How Credit Constraints Impact Job
Finding Rates, Sorting & Aggregate Output. Technical Report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Herkenhoff, K., Phillips, G.M., Cohen-Cole, E., 2021. The impact of consumer credit
access on self-employment and entrepreneurship. J. Financ. Econ. 141 (1), 345–371.
Hsu,  J.W.,  Matsa,  D.A.,  Melzer,  B.T.,  2018.  Unemployment  insurance  as  a  housing

market stabilizer. Amer. Econ. Rev. 108 (1), 49–81.

for the unemployed. Working Paper.

Kalda, A., 2019. Peer financial distress and individual leverage. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33,

3348–3390.

Katz, L.F., Meyer, B.D., 1990. The impact of the potential duration of unemployment

benefits on the duration of unemployment. J. Public Econ. 41 (1), 45–72.

22 

