Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Information technology and lender competition✩
Xavier Vives a,∗, Zhiqiang Ye b
a IESE Business School, Av. de Pearson, 21, Barcelona, 08034, Spain
b School of Economics, Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Rd, Hangzhou, 310058, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We study how information technology (IT) affects lender competition, entrepreneurs’ investment, and welfare
in a spatial model. The effects of an IT improvement depend on whether it weakens the influence of lender–
borrower distance on monitoring costs. If it does, it has a hump-shaped effect on entrepreneurs’ investment and
social welfare. If not, competition intensity does not vary, improving lender profits, entrepreneurs’ investment,
and social welfare. When entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem is severe, IT-induced competition is more likely
to reduce investment and welfare. We also find that lenders’ price discrimination is not welfare-optimal. Our
results are consistent with received empirical work on lending to SMEs.

Dataset link: Information Technology and Lend
er Competition (Original data)

JEL classification:
G21
G23
I31

Keywords:
Credit
Monitoring
FinTech
Price discrimination
Moral hazard
Regulation

1.  Introduction

The banking industry is undergoing a digital revolution. A grow-
ing number of financial technology (FinTech) companies and BigTech
platforms are engaging in traditional banking businesses using their in-
novative information and automation technologies.1 Incumbent banks
are also moving from reliance on physical branches to adopting infor-
mation  technology  (IT)  and  Big  Data  in  response  to  the  availability
of  technology  and  to  changes  in  consumer  expectations  of  service,
which  are  two  main  drivers  of  digital  disruption  (FSB, 2019).  Such
a transformation spurs the banking sector’s increasing investment in
IT, allowing financial intermediaries to offer personalized services and

to  price  discriminate.  The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  accelerated  this
digitalization  process  and  fostered  remote  loan  operations  and  the
development and diffusion of IT in the credit market (Carletti et al.,
2020).

How do the development and diffusion of information technology
affect  lending  competition?  What  are  the  welfare  implications  of  IT
progress? In particular, does the type of IT matter for competition and
welfare? Is there a welfare loss from price discrimination? To answer
those  questions,  we  build  a  model  of  spatial  competition  in  which
lenders compete to provide entrepreneurs with loans. Lenders in our
model refer to institutions that can provide loans in the credit mar-
ket, including commercial banks, shadow banks, fintechs, or BigTech

✩
Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments. We are also grateful to
participants at the CEBRA 2021 Annual Meeting, EARIE 2021 Annual Conference, EFA 2021 Annual Meeting, ESEM Virtual 2021, Finance Forum 2022, FIRS
2021 Conference, MADBAR 2020 Workshop, Bocconi-CEPR 2023 Fintech conference, and the Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Brazil 2024 (and especially
to our discussants Toni Ahnert, David Martinez-Miera, Cecilia Parlatore, David Rivero and Lin Shen) and at seminars sponsored by the Bank of Canada, Banque
de France, SaMMF Johns Hopkins and Swiss Finance Institute at EPFL– in particular, to Tobias Berg, Hans Degryse, Andreas Fuster, Zhiguo He, Julien Hugonnier,
Robert Marquez, Gregor Matvos, Sofia Priazhkina, Uday Rajan, Amit Seru, Laura Veldkamp, Chaojun Wang, Pierre-Olivier Weill, David Xiaoyu Xu and Liyan
Yang. Giorgia Trupia provided excellent research assistance. Xavier Vives acknowledges the financial support of Grant Ref. PID2021-123113NB-I00 funded by
MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033 and ‘‘ERDF A way of making Europe’’ by the European Union.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: xvives@iese.edu (X. Vives), zhiqiangye@zju.edu.cn (Z. Ye).

1 Prominent examples can be seen in China, where Alibaba and Tencent – the two largest BigTech companies – are active in a wide range of financial services
that include payments, wealth management, and lending. In the United States, almost one-third of small and medium firms that sought financing applied with a
FinTech firm or online lender, up from 19% in 2016 (US Federal Reserve’s Small Business Credit Survey 2019). The annual growth rate of the volume of FinTech
business lending in the United States was greater than 40% from 2016 to 2020 (Berg et al., 2022). See also Vives (2019).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103957
Received 22 July 2022; Received in revised form 7 October 2024; Accepted 11 October 2024
Available online 25 October 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

platforms. Our model will help to illuminate the following empirical
results:

• Business lending by banks with better IT adoption is less affected
by the distance between banks and their borrowers (Ahnert et al.,
2024).

• Borrowers with better access to bank financing request loans at
lower interest rates on a fintech’s platform (Butler et al., 2017). A
bank will charge its borrowers higher loan rates if the borrowers
get geographically closer to the bank or/and farther away from
competing banks (Herpfer et al., 2022).

• Increased  bank/branch  industry  specialization  (e.g.,  in  export/
SME) lending curtails bank competition (Paravisini et al., 2023;
Duquerroy et al., 2022). Broadband internet implementation in-
tensifies  bank  competition  and  reduces  banks’  loan  prices
(D’Andrea et al., 2021).

• Banks  with  superior  IT  adoption  have  higher  loan  growth
(Dadoukis et al., 2021 and Branzoli et al., 2024). Entrepreneur-
ship  is  stronger  in  US  counties  that  are  more  exposed  to  IT-
intensive banks (Ahnert et al., 2024).

• The relationship between bank competition and bank credit sup-

ply is hump-shaped (Di Patti and Dell’Ariccia, 2004).

The lending market is modeled as a linear city à la Hotelling (1929)
where two lenders located at the two extremes of the city compete for
entrepreneurs who are distributed along the segment. Entrepreneurs
can undertake scalable risky investment projects, which may succeed
or fail, and have no initial capital. Hence, they require funding from
lenders.  Lenders  have  no  direct  access  to  investment  projects  and
compete in a Bertrand fashion by simultaneously posting their discrim-
inatory loan rate schedules. We take it as given that IT is advanced
enough for lenders to price flexibly. An entrepreneur can shirk and de-
rive a private benefit, which is ex-ante random and unobservable, after
obtaining loans from the lender; if she shirks, her investment project
will fail for sure. A critical lender function is monitoring entrepreneurs
to reduce their private benefits of shirking (see, e.g., Holmstrom and
Tirole, 1997).  Monitoring  is  more  costly  for  a  lender  if  there  is  a
larger distance between the lender and the monitored entrepreneur.
This distance can be physical2 or in the characteristics space from the
lender’s expertise in certain sectors or industries.3 After an entrepreneur
has chosen a lender for funding, her private benefit of shirking becomes
observable to the lender, which will then adjust credit availability –
modeled as the maximum size of the loan available to the entrepreneur
– based on the observed private benefit. For simplicity, we assume that
lenders can provide loans at a given marginal funding cost and do not
model how lenders compete to develop relationships with investors or
depositors.4

2 There is evidence that firm–lender physical distance matters for lending.
See Degryse and Ongena (2005), Petersen and Rajan (2002) and Brevoort and
Wolken (2009).

3 Blickle  et  al. (2023)  find  that  a  bank  ‘‘specializes’’  by  concentrating
its  lending  disproportionately  on  one  industry  where  it  has  better  knowl-
edge. Paravisini et al. (2023) document that exporters to a given country are
more likely to be financed by a bank with better expertise. Duquerroy et al.
(2022) find that in local markets, there exist specialized bank branches that
concentrate their SME lending on certain industries.

4 We  admit  that  this  is  a  limitation. Drechsler  et  al. (2021)  emphasize
the importance of the deposit franchise for banks to increase their market
power over retail deposits, allowing them to borrow at rates that are low and
insensitive to market interest rates. Matutes and Vives (1996) and Cordella
and Yeyati (2002) study bank competition for deposits within a similar spatial
competition framework, but in their models, banks can directly invest in risky
assets.

2 

The model has two important ingredients: First, lender monitoring
matters for welfare since it enables entrepreneurs with moral hazard
problems  to  obtain  credit  and  invest.  Second,  lenders  cannot  credi-
bly commit to monitoring effort ex ante since they can adjust credit
availability later (after observing entrepreneurs’ private benefits).

We  distinguish  two  types  of  information  technology:  (a)  infor-
mation  collection/processing  technology  (IT-basic  for  short)  and  (b)
distance friction-reducing technology (IT-distance for short). Improve-
ments in the two types of IT generate different outcomes. Specifically,
an improvement in IT-basic lowers evenly the costs of monitoring en-
trepreneurs in different locations. Such an improvement in the lending
sector does not affect lenders’ relative cost advantage in different loca-
tions – for example, by improving the ability to collect more valuable
data  and  process  them  with  better  computer  hardware  or  informa-
tion  management  software  (e.g.,  desktop  applications).  In  contrast,
improving IT-distance reduces the negative effect of lender–borrower
distance on monitoring costs. Such an improvement lowers more signif-
icantly the costs of monitoring entrepreneurs located farther away. For
example, better internet connectivity and communication technology
(e.g., video conferencing) reduce the physical distance friction.5 The
improvement in remote learning devices, search engines, and artificial
intelligence  (AI)  makes  it  easier  to  extend  expertise,  thereby  reduc-
ing  the  expertise  distance  friction.  Big  Data  and  machine  learning
techniques may improve both IT-basic and IT-distance.6

Under  the  set-up  described,  we  study  how  information  technol-
ogy affects lender competition and obtain results consistent with the
available  empirical  evidence.  The  equilibrium  consequences  of  im-
provements in the two types of technology (IT-basic v.s. IT-distance)
are compared. We find that by adopting more advanced IT, whatever its
type, a lender can charge higher loan rates and provide more loans. This
is so because a lender’s IT progress increases its competitive advantage
over its rival.

When both lenders make technological progress, that progress will
not  increase  the  overall  competitive  advantage  of  either  lender.  In
this  case,  different  types  of  IT  progress  can  yield  different  results.
If IT progress reduces the costs of monitoring an entrepreneur with-
out altering lenders’ relative cost advantage (i.e., IT-basic improves),
lenders’ competition intensity will not be affected. In this case, the loan
rates that lenders offer to entrepreneurs do not vary; lenders become
more  profitable  and  provide  more  loans  because  monitoring  is  now
cheaper (i.e., monitoring efficiency is higher). However, if IT progress
involves  a  weakening  in  the  influence  of  lender–borrower  distance
on monitoring costs (i.e., IT-distance improves), lenders’ competition
intensity will increase because their differentiation becomes smaller.
Then, the loan rates offered to entrepreneurs decline for both lenders.
Such a differentiation-reducing effect decreases lenders’ profits despite
the fact that IT progress makes monitoring cheaper.

The effect of IT-distance progress on lenders’ credit supply is ‘‘hump-
shaped’’. IT-distance progress generates three effects on loan supply:
First,  it  improves  lenders’  monitoring  efficiency,  tending  to  increase
their credit supply. Second, lenders’ differentiation and loan rates de-
crease, increasing entrepreneurs’ skin in the game and alleviating moral
hazard; this effect also tends to increase credit supply. Finally, lenders’
skin in the game decreases, reducing their monitoring incentives and
willingness to supply credit. The first two effects dominate and increase
lenders’ credit supply and entrepreneurs’ investment when IT-distance
is not sufficiently advanced (i.e., when lender differentiation is high),
while the last effect – the decrease in lenders’ monitoring incentives

5 Jiang et al. (2023) finds that 3G mobile networks significantly reduce

distance friction for banks, geographically expanding their lending.

6 There  are  many  companies  (e.g.,  Zestfinance,  Scienaptic  systems,
Datarobot, Underwrite.ai) that help the financial industry improve information
processing via Big Data and machine learning techniques, thus transforming
soft data into hard data. See also Boot et al. (2021).

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

–  dominates  and  reduces  lenders’  credit  supply  and  entrepreneurs’
investment  when  IT-distance  is  sufficiently  advanced.  Moreover,  as
entrepreneurs’  moral  hazard  problem  becomes  more  severe,  the  last
effect will be more likely to dominate the first two. The reason is that a
more severe moral hazard problem increases the need for monitoring,
hence making the provision of monitoring incentives (determined by
lenders’ skin in the game) more important to credit supply. In contrast,
IT-basic progress unambiguously increases lenders’ credit supply since
it has no differentiation effect.

Our model can shed light on the competition between a traditional
bank – which has better access to firm data and hence an advantage in
IT-basic – and a fintech lender with better IT-distance and lack of firm
data. With its better IT-basic, the bank can ensure a positive market
share because it has higher monitoring efficiency than the fintech when
serving  firms  sufficiently  close  to  the  bank.  The  implication  is  that
although fintechs, with their advantage in IT-distance, can bring com-
petitive pressure to banks, the latter will not be completely replaced.
Moreover, if the bank has a cheaper funding source (e.g., deposits) than
the fintech, then the bank will offer lower loan rates and volumes than
the fintech when serving entrepreneurs of similar characteristics.

Next,  we  analyze  the  welfare  effects  of  information  technology
progress. We find that more intense competition does not always favor
social welfare. When lender competition is not intense, increasing com-
petition intensity improves welfare because it increases entrepreneurs’
skin in the game from excessively low levels and substantially alleviates
their moral hazard problem. Yet ‘‘too much’’ competition reduces social
welfare because high competition intensity decreases lenders’ skin in
the game and their monitoring incentives, thereby reducing lenders’
willingness  to  extend  credit  supply.  Hence,  an  improvement  in  IT-
distance – which decreases lender differentiation – may or may not
benefit social welfare owing to the consequent increased lender compe-
tition. IT-distance progress will be more likely to reduce social welfare
when entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem is more severe because the
need for monitoring will increase in this case, making lenders’ monitor-
ing incentives more crucial. In contrast, improving lenders’ IT-basic has
no differentiation effect and hence improves welfare unambiguously.
From the social point of view, the welfare-maximizing loan rate does
not depend on lenders’ IT. This rate represents the socially optimal way
to  share  the  project  value  between  an  entrepreneur  and  her  lender.
Although a lender’s IT determines the value of a project it finances
(i.e.,  the  size  of  the  pie),  the  welfare-maximizing  way  to  share  the
pie must balance the severity of the entrepreneur’s moral hazard and
the lender’s monitoring incentive, which is a trade-off independent of
the  lender’s  IT.  The  implication  is  that  lenders’  price  discrimination
will  generate  inefficient  equilibrium  outcomes:  A  lender  will  price
aggressively at far-away locations – where the lender’s IT advantage
is low – to gain as much business as possible while at locations close
to the lender’s area of specialization it will price very high to exploit
its high IT advantage. Such a strategy does not balance the severity
of moral hazards well with the lender’s monitoring incentive at each
location. Regulators can improve welfare by setting a proper reference
loan rate for lenders and limiting their ability to price discriminate.

Related literature. Our work builds on the spatial competition mod-
els  of Hotelling (1929)  and Thisse  and  Vives (1988)  but  focuses  on
lenders’ competition to finance entrepreneurs’ projects. Villas-Boas and
Schmidt-Mohr (1999) build a spatial model studying how lending com-
petition affects the collateral requirements of bank contracts. Several
papers  have  emphasized  the  importance  of  monitoring  in  lending.7
Almazan (2002) studies how lender capitalization, interest rates, and

7 See,  e.g., Diamond (1984)  and Holmstrom  and  Tirole (1997)  for

pioneering work.

regulatory  shocks  affect  monitoring  efficiency  in  a  spatial  competi-
tion model where lenders have no market power over entrepreneurs.
Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2019) examine the effectiveness of mon-
etary and macroprudential policies in addressing a financial system’s
risks  within  a  framework  where  lender  monitoring  can  increase  the
probability that investing in an entrepreneur yields a positive return.8
Different from the aforementioned papers, our model focuses on how
different types of IT progress (IT-basic v.s. IT-distance) generate dif-
ferent  effects  on  lenders’  monitoring,  market  power,  entrepreneurs’
investment, and welfare.

Our paper also belongs to the literature studying information tech-
nology and lending competition. Hauswald and Marquez (2006) extend
the adverse selection model in Hauswald and Marquez (2003) and show
that the equilibrium loan rates received by borrowers are decreasing
in the lender–borrower distance and in the intensity of lender com-
petition (measured by the number of lenders), similar to our model
prediction.  However,  our  model  builds  on  a  different  mechanism  –
entrepreneurs’ moral hazard and lender monitoring (as in Holmstrom
and  Tirole, 1997)  –  and  we  analyze  the  relationship  between  the
severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard and the equilibrium effects of
IT  progress.  Furthermore,  our  results  differ  from  those  of Hauswald
and Marquez (2006), in which an improvement in the lending sector’s
IT will soften lender competition, and social welfare increases in the
intensity of lender competition if competition is already very intense.
In  contrast,  we  find  that  lender  competition  is  either  intensified  or
unaffected by the lending sector’s IT improvements, depending on the
type of improved IT, and that social welfare decreases in the intensity
of lender competition if competition is very intense.

In a model where a traditional bank and a fintech lender compete to
extend loans, He et al. (2023) analyze the effects of ‘‘open banking’’ –
an  information  sharing  mechanism  that  enables  borrowers  to  share
their customer data stored in a bank with a fintech that has advanced
information  processing  technology  but  less  access  to  customer  data.
They find that open banking increases the fintech’s screening ability but
that it can soften lending competition and hurt borrowers if the fintech
is ‘‘over-empowered’’ by the data sharing mechanism. Our work has
a different focus: we distinguish two types of information technology
and compare their different equilibrium consequences. In addition, we
show that one lender’s IT progress and the entire lending sector’s IT
progress generate quite different equilibrium outcomes.

Our  theoretical  framework  is  relevant  to  the  empirical  literature
on information technology adoption in the lending market, which has
thrived owing to the rise of FinTech in recent years.9 To start with,
there is considerable evidence showing that IT makes non-traditional
data useful for assessing the quality of borrowers.10 Moreover, a wide
stream of research documents the lending efficiency increase brought

8 Bouvard et al. (2022) study lending and monitoring in a market where a
bigtech and competitive banks can provide loans and monitor entrepreneurs.
In addition to providing loans, the bigtech itself is a monopolistic platform
charging participation fees from entrepreneurs (i.e., merchants).

9 Philippon (2016) claims that the existing financial system’s inefficiency
can explain the emergence of new entrants that bring novel technology to the
sector. Gopal and Schnabl (2022) show that most of the increase in fintech
lending to SMEs after the 2008 financial crisis substituted for a bank lending
reduction.
10 The  non-traditional  data  include  soft  information  (Iyer  et  al., 2016),
friendships and social networks (Lin et al., 2013), applicants’ description text
(Dorfleitner  et  al., 2016; Gao  et  al., 2023; Netzer  et  al., 2019),  contract
terms (Kawai et al., 2022; Hertzberg et al., 2018), mobile phone call records
(Björkegren and Grissen, 2020), digital footprints (Agarwal et al., 2023; Berg
et al., 2020), and cashless payment information (Ghosh et al., 2022; Ouyang,
2023).

3 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Fig. 1. The economy.

about  by  information  technology.11 Several  papers  provide  evidence
consistent with our results. Branzoli et al. (2024) and Dadoukis et al.
(2021) find that banks with higher IT adoption have larger loan growth;
this is consistent with our finding that an improvement of a lender’s IT
increases its lending volume. D’Andrea et al. (2021) find that broad-
band internet implementation intensifies bank competition and reduces
banks’ loan prices, which is consistent with the effect of IT-distance
progress  in  our  model. Ahnert  et  al. (2024)  document  that  small
business lending by banks with higher IT adoption is less affected by
the distance between the bank headquarters and their borrowers. Our
model aligns with this finding. Ahnert et al. (2024) also find that job
creation by young enterprises, a proxy for entrepreneurship, is stronger
in US counties that are more exposed to IT-intensive banks; consistent
with this finding, our model shows that IT-basic progress in the lending
sector spurs credit supply and entrepreneurial investment. However, IT-
distance progress intensifies lender competition, so its effect on lenders’
credit supply is hump-shaped, which is consistent with Di Patti and
Dell’Ariccia (2004).12

The rest of our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the
model setup. Section 3 examines the lending market equilibrium, and
Section 4 examines  the  effects  of  information  technology.  Section 5
provides  a  welfare  analysis  of  information  technology  progress.  We
conclude  in  Section 6 with  a  summary  of  our  findings. Appendix  A
presents the proofs while other appendices deal with model extensions.

2.  The model

The economy and players. The economy is represented by a linear
‘‘city’’,  of  length  1,  that  is  inhabited  by  entrepreneurs  and  lenders.
At each location, there is one penniless entrepreneur. A point on the
city represents the characteristics of the entrepreneur (type of project,
technology, geographical position, industry, . . .) at this location, and
two close points mean that the entrepreneurs in those locations are
similar.

There  are  two  lenders,  labeled  by 𝑖 ∈  {1, 2},  located  at  the  two
extremes of the city. Hence, a lender is closer to some entrepreneurs
than to others. This means, for example, that lenders are specialized in
different sectors of the economy (see Paravisini et al., 2023 for export-
related lending, Duquerroy et al., 2022 for SME lending and Giometti

11 Buchak  et  al. (2018)  find  that  lenders  with  advanced  technology  can
offer more convenient services to borrowers and hence charge higher loan
rates in the US mortgage market than traditional banks. Frost et al. (2019)
report that, in Argentina, credit assessment based on Big Data (e.g., platform
transactions and the reputation of sellers) and processed with machine learning
techniques has outperformed credit bureau ratings in terms of predicting the
loss rates of small businesses. Fuster et al. (2019) estimate that technology-
based lenders process mortgage applications 20% faster than traditional banks
without incurring greater default risk. Liu et al. (2024) find that a BigTech
lender has superior information about entrepreneurs in its ecosystem, so it
can extend loans to borrowers underserved by banks without incurring greater
risks.
12 The literature on the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) launched by
the US Small Business Administration (SBA) also highlights the importance of
technology. However, we will refrain from explaining those findings within
our framework because PPP loans - when properly used by borrowers - are
forgivable and carry a uniform loan rate of 1%, which drastically diminishes
the space for lenders’ monitoring and strategic pricing.

and Pietrosanti, 2023 for syndicated corporate loans). If the distance
between an entrepreneur and lender 1 is 𝑧, we say that the entrepreneur
is  located  at  (location) 𝑧.  As  a  result,  the  distance  between  the  en-
trepreneur at 𝑧 and lender 2 is 1 − 𝑧. Fig. 1 gives an illustration of the
economy.

Entrepreneurs and investment projects. Each entrepreneur has no
initial capital and is endowed with a scalable risky investment project;
hence,  entrepreneurs  require  funding  from  lenders  to  undertake
projects.

An entrepreneur’s project return depends on (a) whether the en-
trepreneur  shirks  and  (b)  the  entrepreneur’s  investment  size.  If  the
entrepreneur at 𝑧 invests 𝐼(𝑧) and does not shirk, her project yields
the following risky return (where 𝑅 > 0):

{

̃𝑅(𝐼(𝑧)) =

𝐼(𝑧)𝑅 with probability 𝑝,
0

with probability 1 − 𝑝.

In the event of success (resp. failure) – which happens with probability
𝑝 (resp. 1 − 𝑝)  –  the  entrepreneur’s  project  yields 𝐼(𝑧)𝑅 (resp.  0).
The success probability 𝑝 ∈  (0, 1) is a constant.13 Project returns are
independent for entrepreneurs who do not shirk. Lenders post loan rates
and provide credit to entrepreneurs. If the entrepreneur at 𝑧 borrows
𝐼𝑖(𝑧) units of funds from lender 𝑖 (𝑖 ∈  {1, 2}) at loan rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧), the
entrepreneur must promise to repay 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)𝑟𝑖(𝑧).
The funding costs of lenders. We assume lenders can provide loans
at a given marginal funding cost, 𝑓 .14 Appendix B analyzes the case
where the two lenders have different marginal funding costs. We let
𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓  > 0 hold, meaning that entrepreneurs’ projects can generate
positive expected returns net of funding cost.

Shirking opportunity and lender monitoring. An entrepreneur can
shirk and derive a private benefit from investment. Following Holmstrom
and  Tirole (1997),  we  assume  that  shirking  brings  the  entrepreneur
(at 𝑧) a total private benefit of 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) ̃𝐵(𝑧) if she invests 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) units of
funds without being monitored, where ̃𝐵(𝑧) > 0 is the random marginal
private benefit derived from a unit of investment. If the entrepreneur
shirks, her investment project fails (i.e., returns 0) for sure.

Before the entrepreneur at 𝑧 determines which lender to borrow
̃𝐵(𝑧) is random and unobservable to entrepreneurs and lenders.
from,
The random variable ̃𝐵(𝑧) is independent across locations 𝑧 and follows
a binary distribution:
𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏.( ̃𝐵(𝑧) = 𝐵) = 𝑘 and 𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏.( ̃𝐵(𝑧) = 𝑏) = 1 − 𝑘,

(1)

with 𝐵  >  𝑏 and 𝑘 ∈  [0, 1].  From  lenders’  perspective,  the  shirking
opportunity  gives  rise  to  the  entrepreneurs’  moral  hazard  problem,
which is more severe when ̃𝐵(𝑧) = 𝐵 than when ̃𝐵(𝑧) = 𝑏. Therefore,
a higher 𝑘 implies a higher ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral
hazard problem. We assume 𝐵  < 𝑓 , implying that shirking is always

13 We could also allow the entrepreneur to influence the success probability
by exerting effort. Then, an additional effect is introduced, but our results are
robust to this extension.
14 Similar  assumptions  are  adopted  in Holmstrom  and  Tirole (1997),
Hauswald and Marquez (2003, 2006), and He et al. (2023). An alternative
assumption is that lenders have no capital and attract deposits or debt from
competitive risk-neutral investors, who require a break-even expected funding
unit’s return of 𝑓 .

4 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

socially undesirable since it cannot generate a non-negative return net
of funding costs.

After  the  entrepreneur  at 𝑧 builds  her  lending  relationship  with
lender 𝑖, ̃𝐵(𝑧) realizes and becomes observable to both the entrepreneur
and  the  lender.  Then,  lender 𝑖 can  monitor  the  entrepreneur  and
decrease her private benefit of shirking by 𝑚𝑖(𝑧), the lender’s monitoring
intensity at 𝑧. As a result, the entrepreneur will not shirk if and only if
the following incentive compatibility (IC) condition holds:
𝑝𝐼𝑖(𝑧)(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) ≥ 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) [IC].

(2)

If the entrepreneur does not shirk, her expected utility (i.e., profit) is
the left-hand side of (2): she receives 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) in the event of
success,  which  happens  with  probability 𝑝.  If  she  shirks,  her  utility
becomes 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) since the project returns 0.
Credit limit. After observing ̃𝐵(𝑧), lender 𝑖 can set a loan size upper-
bound 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) (‘‘credit limit’’) for the entrepreneur at 𝑧 to control moral
hazard by capping her investment scale. Since the entrepreneur’s fund-
ing comes from the lender, the entrepreneur’s investment scale cannot
exceed 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) (i.e., 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) ∈ [0, 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)]).

In our model, lender 𝑖 manages its borrowers’ moral hazard through
two channels: (a) monitoring (represented by 𝑚𝑖(𝑧)), and (b) controlling
credit availability (represented by 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)). Our setup is consistent with
the  theory  and  evidence  of Acharya  et  al. (2014),  in  which  banks
discipline  borrowers  by  combining  monitoring  and  the  capacity  to
adjust credit lines based on future information.15

Non-trivial moral hazard. Throughout the paper, we assume that the
̃𝐵(𝑧) is sufficiently large such that the moral
marginal private benefit
hazard problem is not trivial:
̃𝐵(𝑧) ≥ 2(𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 ),

(3)

which is equivalent to 𝐵 > 𝑏 ≥ 2(𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 ). Inequality (3) implies that,
without  monitoring,  an  entrepreneur’s  per-unit  expected  pledgeable
income cannot make lenders break even.16 To see this, consider that
the entrepreneur at 𝑧 borrows from lender 𝑖 with the loan rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧).
Without monitoring, she will not shirk if and only if 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) ≥ ̃𝐵(𝑧),
implying 𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ≤ 𝑝𝑅 − ̃𝐵(𝑧);  that  is,  the  entrepreneur  can  at  most
pledge an expected marginal return of 𝑝𝑅 − ̃𝐵(𝑧) to lender 𝑖. However,
Inequality (3) implies 𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ≤ 𝑝𝑅 − ̃𝐵(𝑧) <  𝑓 , so the entrepreneur’s
expected  pledgeable  income  cannot  cover  lender 𝑖’s  funding  costs  if
there is no monitoring. As a result, lenders must monitor borrowers
when lending.

Monitoring  and  information  technology. If  the  entrepreneur  at 𝑧
borrows from lender 𝑖 and is monitored with intensity 𝑚𝑖(𝑧), the lender
incurs the monitoring cost:
𝐶𝑖(𝑚𝑖(𝑧), 𝑧) =

(𝑚𝑖(𝑧))2.

(4)

𝑐𝑖
2(1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖)

Here 𝑐𝑖 > 0, 𝑞𝑖 ∈  [0, 1), and 𝑠𝑖 is the distance between lender 𝑖 and
location 𝑧; hence, we have 𝑠𝑖 = 𝑧 (resp. 𝑠𝑖 =  1 − 𝑧) if 𝑖 =  1 (resp.
𝑖 = 2). The parameters 𝑐𝑖 and 𝑞𝑖 are inverse measures of the efficiency of
lender 𝑖’s information technology. Parameter 𝑐𝑖 is the slope of marginal
monitoring  costs  when  lender–borrower  distance  is  zero,  and  hence
represents lender 𝑖’s basic monitoring efficiency (IT-basic). Parameter
𝑞𝑖 (IT-distance of  lender 𝑖)  measures  the  negative  effect  of  lender–
borrower ‘‘distance friction’’ on the lender’s information collection and

15 Sufi (2009) finds that firms do not treat banks’ credit lines as a cash-
like liquidity commitment because credit lines are adjustable. Chodorow-Reich
and Falato (2022) show that banks can reduce loan commitment following
borrowers’ covenant violations.
16 In addition, Inequality (3) implies that an entrepreneur’s ex-ante expected
utility (to be specified later by Eq. (10)) is a concave function of the loan rate
she borrows with, which ensures that all equilibrium outcomes are continuous
functions of parameters and simplifies our analysis.

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

data analysis.17 The cost function (4) captures the idea that a lender
has a greater capacity to discipline nearby borrowers and must expend
more effort to monitor entrepreneurs who are more distant from the
lender’s expertise or geographic location.18

=

)2

1 − 𝑞(1 − 𝑧)
1 − 𝑞 𝑧

Remark. The cost function (4) has two crucial properties when 𝑞1 =
𝑞2 = 𝑞 and 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐. First, the ratio of the two lenders’ monitoring
costs at location 𝑧 (i.e., 𝐶1(𝑚1, 𝑧)∕𝐶2(𝑚2, 𝑧)) is independent of 𝑐 for any
given 𝑚1 and 𝑚2:
𝐶1(𝑚1, 𝑧)
𝐶2(𝑚2, 𝑧)
This property implies that increasing 𝑐 does not affect a lender’s relative
cost  advantage,  although  it  makes  monitoring  more  costly  for  both
lenders. The second property is
𝜕2( 𝐶1(𝑚1,𝑧)
𝐶2(𝑚2,𝑧)
𝜕 𝑧𝜕 𝑞

2(1 − 𝑞(1 − 𝑧))
(1 − 𝑞 𝑧)3

( 𝑚1
𝑚2

( 𝑚1
𝑚2

> 0,

(5)

)2

=

)

.

which means that the sensitivity of the relative cost advantage to 𝑧
is  increasing  in 𝑞.  Note  that 𝐶1(𝑚1, 𝑧)∕𝐶2(𝑚2, 𝑧) is  increasing  in 𝑧.
Therefore, a higher 𝑞 not only makes monitoring more costly but also
magnifies  the  importance  of  lender  specialization  by  increasing  the
importance of distance in determining the relative cost advantage of
a lender’s monitoring.

Interpretation of monitoring. Lenders typically monitor their borrow-
ers through information collection and analysis (Minnis and Sutherland,
2017; Gustafson et al., 2021; Branzoli and Fringuellotti, 2022). Specif-
ically,  lenders  can  collect  entrepreneurs’  data  (e.g.,  by  onsite  visits
or  frequently  requesting  information)  and  assess  whether  funds  are
diverted toward private benefits. If borrowers are not acting appropri-
ately, lenders can provide warnings and threats, disciplining borrowers
and potentially improving their behavior.19 Eq. (4) captures the fact
that  a  lender’s  efficiency  of  information  acquisition  and  processing
depends on not only its basic capability but also the distance friction.
The  distance  friction  can  be  interpreted  in  two  ways.  First,  we
can view 𝑠𝑖 as the ‘‘physical distance’’ between location 𝑧 and lender
𝑖. Physical distance matters because first-hand borrower information
often contains soft information that is hard to convey to distant loan
officers, incurring informativeness loss in the process of remote infor-
mation transmission (see Liberti and Petersen, 2019). The second way
is  to  view 𝑠𝑖 as  the  “expertise  distance’’  between  an  entrepreneur’s
characteristics and lender 𝑖’s s specialization. The effectiveness of an in-
formation analysis framework will be lower when it is used to deal with
firms  beyond  the  framework’s  intended  scope  of  application  (e.g.,  a
framework for a food company or a real estate company).

Distance friction can be weakened by some technologies. The diffu-
sion of the internet and the development of communication technology
(like smartphones, mobile apps, social media, or video conferencing)
facilitate  remote  information  collection  and  exchange,  reducing  the
friction caused by physical distance. The friction of the expertise dis-
tance can be weakened if an IT improvement facilitates human capital’s

17 A similar classification of technology can be found in Boot et al. (2021).
18 This is consistent with Giometti and Pietrosanti (2023) who document that
lenders specialize in lending to specific industries because of their information
advantages in monitoring those industries.
19 If  the  collected  information  shows  a  breach  of  covenants,  lenders  can
obtain control rights and directly intervene to fix borrowers’ behavior. Such
intervention  is  easier  for  BigTech  lenders  since  they  have  advantages  in
information  collection  and  contract  enforcement  in  their  ecosystems  (Liu
et al., 2024); in addition, they can threaten to exclude misbehaving borrowers
from future use of their platforms (Frost et al., 2019 and Li and Pegoraro,
2023).  With  advanced  information  technology  (such  as  the  abundance  of
comprehensive transactional and locational data on borrowers’ online activities
and  machine  learning  techniques),  this  kind  of  monitoring  process  can  be
conducted almost on a real-time basis (Chen et al., 2022).

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Fig. 2. Timeline.

Table 1
Technology improvements and monitoring efficiency.
Improvement of efficiency
Decreasing 𝑐𝑖 (improvement in
collecting or/and processing
information)
Decreasing 𝑞𝑖 (physical distance
friction)
(improvement in communication)
Decreasing 𝑞𝑖 (expertise distance
friction)
(extending competence of human
capital/hardening soft information)

Related technology
ML with big/unconventional data
advances in cloud storage and computing,
information management software
Diffusion of internet, video conferencing,
smartphone, mobile apps, social media

ML with big/unconventional data, remote
learning and AI

expansion of specialized areas. For example, improvements in remote
learning,  search  engines,  and  AI  (like  GPT)  make  it  easier  for  loan
officers to process the information of firms they do not specialize in,
thereby decreasing 𝑞𝑖.

Technologies  that  decrease 𝑐𝑖 are  related  to  improvements  in
lenders’ basic efficiency of information acquisition and/or processing,
such  as  advances  in  chip  technology  and  cloud  computing/storage,
adopting  better  software  (e.g.,  desktop  applications,  see He  et  al.,
2022), and exploiting new sources of information (like transaction data
and digital footprints) with machine learning (ML) techniques.20

One consequence of technological progress is the increased avail-
ability of cheap but imprecise data (see Dugast and Foucault, 2018).
In this case, information acquisition becomes easier but the decrease in
data quality increases the difficulty of information processing. The net
change of 𝑐𝑖 depends on which effect dominates.

Some  technologies  decrease  both 𝑐𝑖 and 𝑞𝑖:  ML  with  Big  Data
decreases 𝑐𝑖 by improving lender 𝑖’s ability to acquire and process infor-
mation. It also helps to harden soft information (e.g., digital footprints)
and hence reduces the reliance on lenders’ expertise in certain areas,
which lowers 𝑞𝑖. Table 1 summarizes the technology improvements and
the corresponding effects on monitoring efficiency.

Competition with discriminatory loan pricing. Lenders compete in
a localized Bertrand fashion to attract entrepreneurs. Lender 𝑖 follows
a discriminatory pricing policy in which the loan rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) varies as a
function of the entrepreneurial location 𝑧.21

The timing of the duopoly lending game is shown in Fig. 2. First,
lenders  (without  observing ̃𝐵(𝑧))  post  loan  rate  schedules  simulta-
neously.  Once  the  loan  rate  schedules  are  chosen  and  posted,  en-
trepreneurs (without observing ̃𝐵(𝑧)) decide which lender to approach
for  credit.  Then,  lender–borrower  relationships  are  established,  and

20 ML  can  process  real-time  borrower  data  quickly  at  large  volumes  and
low  operating  costs  (Huang  et  al., 2020). Mester  et  al. (2007)  find  that
transaction information in borrowers’ accounts – which provides ongoing data
on borrowers’ activities – is useful for lenders’ monitoring. Dai et al. (2023)
show that monitoring borrowers’ digital footprints can increase the repayment
likelihood on delinquent loans by 26.5% because digital footprints (e.g., cell
phone, email or/and apps footprints) reveal borrowers’ social networks and
physical locations, thereby increasing lenders’ ability to intervene and enforce
the repayment of borrowers.
21 Degryse  and  Ongena (2005)  document  spatial  discrimination  in  loan
pricing. See also Agarwal and Hauswald (2010) and Herpfer et al. (2022).

̃𝐵(𝑧) realizes and becomes observable to both the entrepreneur at 𝑧 and
her lender. Next, lender 𝑖 determines its optimal monitoring intensity
𝑚𝑖(𝑧) and credit limit 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) depending on its entrepreneurs’ locations.
Entrepreneurs choose their investment based on available credit limits,
that is, 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)  ∈  [0, 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)]. Finally, entrepreneurs determine whether to
shirk.

Key ingredients. Compared with a traditional (Hotelling, 1929) model
(where sellers with heterogeneous production costs compete for con-
sumers), our model has two additional ingredients. The first ingredient
is that lenders’ effort (monitoring) matters for welfare since it enables
entrepreneurs to invest.22 The second ingredient is that lenders cannot
commit to effort ex ante (lenders can set their monitoring intensities
and credit limits based on the new information ̃𝐵(𝑧) after entrepreneurs
have chosen lenders).

3.  Equilibrium

In this section, we first derive some optimal decisions of lenders
and entrepreneurs and then solve for the equilibrium loan rates. Since
lenders’  loan  rates  can  vary  with  entrepreneurial  locations,  there  is
localized Bertrand competition between lenders at each location. With-
out loss of generality, we concentrate on location 𝑧 and analyze how
lenders set loan rates to compete for the entrepreneur at 𝑧.

3.1.  Optimal monitoring intensity, credit limit, and entrepreneurs’ decisions

It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  entrepreneur  at 𝑧 always  uses  up  her
credit limit for investment (i.e., 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) holds when she is served
by  lender 𝑖).  After 𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑚𝑖(𝑧),  and 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) have  been  determined,  the
entrepreneur’s ex-post expected utility is as follows:

max
𝐼𝑖(𝑧)∈[0,𝐼𝑖(𝑧)]

{𝐼𝑖(𝑧)𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

) , 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑚𝑖(𝑧)

} ,

(6)

so 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) is obviously her optimal choice.
Optimal monitoring intensity. Lender 𝑖 can anticipate 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)  = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)
when  determining  its  monitoring  intensity 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) at 𝑧.  Since  an  en-
trepreneur’s shirking implies the failure of her project and a zero return
to the lender, lenders must prevent their entrepreneurs from shirking
when providing loans, yielding the following lemma.

If lender 𝑖 provides loans to the entrepreneur at 𝑧 with loan

Lemma 1.
rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) and observes ̃𝐵(𝑧), its optimal monitoring intensity is:
𝑚𝑖(𝑧) = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧))),

(7)

where 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) is the lender’s credit limit at 𝑧.

With 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)  = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧), Lemma  1 means  Condition (2) holds  with
equality. For lenders, the only benefit of costly monitoring is to prevent
entrepreneurs’  shirking.  Hence,  lender 𝑖 will  choose 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) as  low  as
possible, subject to Condition (2), which ensures that the entrepreneur
will not shirk.

22 Without monitoring, entrepreneurs cannot implement their projects be-
cause of the moral hazard problem. Then, both entrepreneurs and lenders make
a zero profit.

6 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

According to Eq. (7), a higher monitoring intensity is needed as the
credit limit (which equals investment) increases. The reason is that a
larger credit size implies private benefits must be reduced more (by
monitoring) to ensure Condition (2). Consistent with the result, Heitz
et  al. (2023)  document  that  a  bank  will  monitor  a  borrower  more
frequently if the loan amount is larger.

In addition, note that 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) is increasing in ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)), which
reflects the severity of the entrepreneur’s moral hazard. To see this,
recall that 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) is the marginal expected return (i.e., skin in the
game) to the entrepreneur at 𝑧 if she does not shirk. Thus, ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 −
𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) measures the potential net benefit she can derive from a unit of
investment by shirking. As ̃𝐵(𝑧) −𝑝(𝑅−𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) increases, shirking becomes
more attractive, so a higher monitoring intensity is needed to prevent
shirking. Obviously, increasing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) will reduce the entrepreneur’s skin
in the game 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)), thereby increasing ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧))) and the
need for monitoring.

Optimal credit limit. According to the timeline, an entrepreneur has
decided which lender to borrow from before lenders determine credit
limits. If the entrepreneur at 𝑧 approaches lender 𝑖, then the lender’s
expected profit from financing the entrepreneur can be written as

𝜋𝑖 (𝑧) = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 ) −

𝑐𝑖
(
1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖

)

2

(𝑚𝑖 (𝑧)

)2 .

(8)

The first term of 𝜋𝑖(𝑧) is the entrepreneur’s expected loan repayment
minus the funding costs. Specifically, if monitoring prevents shirking,
lender 𝑖 will receive the entrepreneur’s full loan repayment 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
with  probability 𝑝 (i.e.,  in  the  event  of  project  success).  The  fund-
ing  costs  are 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)𝑓 .  The  second  term  of 𝜋𝑖(𝑧) represents  lender 𝑖’s
monitoring costs.

Lender 𝑖 chooses its optimal credit limit 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) to maximize its ex-
pected  profit 𝜋𝑖(𝑧),  taking 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) as  given;  the  result  is  presented  in
Lemma 2.

If lender 𝑖 provides loans to the entrepreneur at 𝑧 with loan

Lemma 2.
rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) and observes ̃𝐵(𝑧), its optimal credit limit is:
𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓
𝐼𝑖(𝑧) =
( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)))2

1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖
𝑐𝑖

.

The entrepreneur’s investment size 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) equals 𝐼𝑖(𝑧).

Recall that a larger credit limit or more severe moral hazard needs
a higher monitoring intensity (Lemma 1). Hence, 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) is determined by
how much moral hazard lender 𝑖’s monitoring can alleviate. There are
three factors affecting 𝐼𝑖(𝑧): (a) lender 𝑖’s information technology at 𝑧,
which is represented by (1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖)∕𝑐𝑖, (b) the lender’s skin in the game
𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 , and (c) the entrepreneur’s potential net benefit of shirking,
which is ̃𝐵(𝑧) minus the entrepreneur’s skin in the game 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)).
First, 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) is increasing in (1 −𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖)∕𝑐𝑖 because better IT implies a higher
monitoring efficiency (i.e., monitoring becomes cheaper). Second, 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)
is increasing in 𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 because a higher lender 𝑖’s skin in the game
increases its willingness to provide credit and monitoring. Finally, 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)
is increasing in 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) because a higher entrepreneur’s skin in the
̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 −
game makes the moral hazard problem less severe (i.e.,
𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) becomes smaller), reducing the need for monitoring. Note that
increasing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) increases lender 𝑖’s skin in the game but decreases the
entrepreneur’s, so the net effect of changing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) on 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) is ambiguous
(to be analyzed later in detail).

Entrepreneurs’  decisions.  After  observing  the  loan  rates  posted  by
lenders,  an  entrepreneur  will  approach  the  lender  that  can  provide
higher ex-ante expected entrepreneurial utility. If lender 𝑖 offers loan
rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) at 𝑧, then its expected credit limit 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] (based on Lemma 2
and the distribution of ̃𝐵(𝑧)) is as follows:

𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] =

1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖
𝑐𝑖

(

𝑘 (𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 )
(𝐵 − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

+

))2

(1 − 𝑘)
(𝑏 − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 )
))2

)

.

(9)

7 

As a result, the entrepreneur’s ex-ante expected utility is:
𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) ≡ 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)]
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
given in Eq. (9)

× 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

) ,

(10)

which  takes  into  consideration  that  lender  monitoring  will  prevent
shirking. Inequality (3) ensures that 𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) is a concave func-
tion of 𝑟𝑖(𝑧). Note that the entrepreneur’s expected utility depends not
only  on  her  skin  in  the  game 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) but  also  on  the  expected
credit limit 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)], which is her expected investment. The latter is
affected  by  lender 𝑖’s  IT  and  skin  in  the  game.  Therefore,  the  en-
trepreneur does not simply choose the lender with a lower loan rate. If
𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟1(𝑧)) > 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟2(𝑧)), obviously the entrepreneur will
approach lender 1 for loans.

3.2.  Equilibrium loan rates

In this section, we study how lenders determine their loan rates.

Best loan rate and monopoly loan rate. Before proceeding, we define
two notable loan rates of lender 𝑖.

Definition  1.
Lender 𝑖’s  best  loan  rate  at 𝑧 is  the  loan  rate  that
maximizes the ex-ante expected utility of the entrepreneur at 𝑧. Lender
𝑖’s monopoly loan rate at 𝑧 is the loan rate lender 𝑖 would choose if it
faced no competition at 𝑧.

The best loan rate determines how much utility a lender can provide
in  the  Bertrand  competition,  while  the  monopoly  loan  rate  deter-
mines the maximum profit a lender can earn. The following lemma
characterizes the two loan rates.

Lemma  3.
At  any  location,  a  lender’s  best  loan  rate,  denoted  by 𝑟,
is increasing in 𝑘 and independent of 𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, and 𝑠𝑖, and satisfies 𝑓 ∕𝑝  <
𝑟 <  𝑅. Hence, the maximum expected utility lender 𝑖 can provide to the
entrepreneur  at 𝑧 is 𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖, 𝑟).  A  lender’s  monopoly  loan  rate  is 𝑅.
Lenders will offer loan rates within the interval [𝑟, 𝑅].

If  lender 𝑖 faces  no  competition  at 𝑧,  it  always  prefers  a  higher
loan rate. Hence, its profit-maximizing strategy is to offer the highest
possible  loan  rate 𝑅 and  monitor  the  entrepreneur  at 𝑧 to  prevent
shirking.  Under  this  strategy,  the  lender  extracts  the  entire  project
value, leaving zero surplus to the entrepreneur.

When 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)  = 𝑟, the utility 𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) reaches its maximum.
The best loan rate 𝑟 is higher than 𝑓 ∕𝑝, implying that lowering 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
may not always increase a lender’s attractiveness to entrepreneurs. The
reason is that entrepreneurs care about not only the loan rate but also
the expected credit limit (see Eq. (9)). If 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) is lower than 𝑟, lender
𝑖’s skin in the game and the monitoring incentive will be very small. In
this case, further reducing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) will decrease 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] rapidly, thereby
hurting the entrepreneur at 𝑧. As 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) approaches 𝑓 ∕𝑝, the lender’s skin
in the game 𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 will decrease to 0, implying 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] → 0 (see
Lemma 2). Hence, 𝑟 > 𝑓 ∕𝑝 must hold.

Note that 𝑟 is unaffected by lender 𝑖’s monitoring efficiency (i.e., is
independent of 𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, or 𝑠𝑖). The reason is that 𝑟 represents the en-
trepreneurial utility-maximizing way to allocate the project net value
between an entrepreneur and her lender. Although parameters 𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖,
and 𝑠𝑖 affect the project net value (i.e., the size of the pie), the utility-
maximizing allocation rule (i.e., the sharing of the pie) is independent
of them.

When 𝑘 is higher, the potential marginal private benefit ̃𝐵(𝑧) is more
likely to be high. In this case, entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem is
expected to be more severe, generating a higher need for lenders’ mon-
itoring to alleviate the problem. This means that a lender’s expected
credit limit will be very low if its skin in the game – which determines
the  lender’s  monitoring  incentive  –  is  small.  As  a  result,  allocating
a  higher  share  of  the  pie  to  lenders  (i.e.,  raising  their  monitoring
incentives) is aligned with entrepreneurs’ interests, leading to a higher
best loan rate 𝑟.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

In a competition of the Bertrand type, lender 𝑖’s loan rate is always
within the interval [𝑟, 𝑅]. If 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) < 𝑟, decreasing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) hurts the lender
without increasing its attractiveness, so neither lender will offer a loan
rate  below 𝑟.  In  the  interval [𝑟, 𝑅],  increasing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) implies  a  higher
lender 𝑖’s profit at 𝑧, but it implies lower entrepreneurial utility, thereby
reducing the lender’s attractiveness in the competition.

Equilibrium loan rates. We posit some standard assumptions in our
Bertrand competition model. (i) When 𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟1(𝑧)) = 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 −
𝑧, 𝑟2(𝑧)) holds,  we  assume  that  the  entrepreneur  at 𝑧 will  approach
the lender that can potentially provide a higher maximum expected
entrepreneurial utility (i.e., will approach lender 1 if 𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟) >
𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 −𝑧, 𝑟)).23 (ii) If both 𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟1(𝑧)) = 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 −𝑧, 𝑟2(𝑧)) and
𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟) = 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟) hold, then we assume the entrepreneur
will  randomly  approach  a  lender  with  probability 1∕2;  different  en-
trepreneurs’ random choices are independent.

Using Lemmas 1 to 3, we can solve for lenders’ equilibrium loan
rates. If lender 1 wants to attract the entrepreneur at 𝑧, it must offer a
loan rate weakly more attractive than the best loan rate 𝑟 of lender 2
(i.e., ensure 𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟1(𝑧)) ≥ 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟)). If lender 1 cannot do
so, then the entrepreneur will be served by lender 2 instead. Reasoning
in this way yields the equilibrium loan rates in Proposition 1.24

Proposition 1. Let

̃𝑥 ≡

1 − 𝑐1∕𝑐2 + 𝑐1𝑞2∕𝑐2
𝑐1𝑞2∕𝑐2 + 𝑞1

.

When 0 <  ̃𝑥  < 1,  there  exists  a  unique  equilibrium  in  which  en-
trepreneurs located in [0, ̃𝑥) (resp. ( ̃𝑥, 1]) are served by lender 1 (resp. lender
2). At 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, the entrepreneur is served by lender 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2} with probability
1(𝑧), is the
1∕2. At 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥], lender 1’s equilibrium loan rate schedule, 𝑟∗
unique solution (in interval [𝑟, 𝑅]) of

=

𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟∗
1(𝑧))
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
entrepreneurial utility provided by 𝑟∗
1
At 𝑧 ∈ [ ̃𝑥, 1], lender 2’s equilibrium loan rate schedule 𝑟∗
in a symmetric way.

𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
maximum utility lender 2 provides

(𝑧)

.

(11)

2(𝑧) is determined

Proposition 1 shows the existence and uniqueness of the equilib-
rium. The restriction 0 < ̃𝑥 < 1 guarantees that both lenders can attract
a positive mass of entrepreneurs in equilibrium. If this restriction does
not hold (which occurs when the difference between the two lenders’
IT is sufficiently large), then one lender will drive the other lender out;
in this case, lenders’ pricing policy displayed in Proposition 1 is still
robust for the dominant lender.25 For convenience, we focus on the case
0 < ̃𝑥 < 1 for the rest of the paper.

Proposition  1 implies  that  lender–borrower  distance  matters  for
lending if 𝑞𝑖 > 0 holds for some 𝑖 (i.e., if distance friction exists in
the  market).  Attracting  an  entrepreneur  will  be  harder  for  a  lender
if the entrepreneur is located farther away because then the lender’s
relative cost advantage in monitoring is smaller. As a result, lender 1
(resp. lender 2) can originate loans only in the region [0, ̃𝑥] (resp. [ ̃𝑥, 0]),
and so must give up entrepreneurs who are sufficiently distant. The

23 If 𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟) >  𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟) holds,  lender  1  can  provide  utility
𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟2(𝑧)) + 𝜀 (with 𝜀 small) no matter how lender 2 sets 𝑟2(𝑧).
24 In our model, a lender’s profit at 𝑧 is discontinuous in the two lenders’
loan  rates.  A  pure-strategy  Nash  equilibrium  still  exists  because  Bertrand
lending competition in our model is a better-reply secure game. See Dasgupta
and Maskin (1986) and Reny (1999).
25 For example, if 𝑐2 is much larger than 𝑐1, then ̃𝑥 ≥ 1 will hold; in this
case,  lender  1  is  the  dominant  lender.  The  monitoring  efficiency  and  the
corresponding expected credit limit of lender 2 are so low that it cannot attract
any entrepreneur even if its best loan rate 𝑟 is offered. The equilibrium loan
rate of lender 1 at 𝑧 still equals 𝑟∗
1(𝑧) because lender 2’s competitive pressure
still exists even though it serves no locations.

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

location 𝑧 = ̃𝑥 is the indifference location where neither lender has a cost
advantage in monitoring, that is: (1 − 𝑞1 ̃𝑥)∕𝑐1 = (1 − 𝑞2(1 − ̃𝑥))∕𝑐2. The
two lenders offer the same maximum utility at this location, and the
entrepreneur randomly chooses a lender with a probability of 1∕2. Note
that ̃𝑥 is decreasing in 𝑞1 and 𝑐1; this means lender 1 can reach farther
locations if its information technology develops. This result is consistent
with Ahnert et al. (2024) who document that small business lending
by banks with higher IT adoption is less affected by bank–borrower
distance.

Next, we characterize lenders’ pricing strategies.

Corollary 1.
equilibrium loan rate 𝑟∗
2(𝑧) at 𝑧 ∈ [ ̃𝑥, 1]. At the indifference location 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, 𝑟∗
𝑟∗
holds.

Let 𝑞𝑖 > 0 for some 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2} and 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥]. Lender 1’s
1(𝑧) is decreasing in 𝑧. A symmetric result holds for
2(𝑧) = 𝑟

1(𝑧) = 𝑟∗

With distance friction (i.e., 𝑞𝑖 > 0 for some 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}), the schedule
1(𝑧) displays a ‘‘perverse’’ pattern (see Panel 1 of Fig. 3): As lender
𝑟∗
1’s monitoring efficiency goes down (i.e., as an entrepreneur is farther
away),  the  loan  rate  offered  to  that  entrepreneur  decreases.  Such  a
pattern results from the optimal pricing strategy of lender 1 at 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥]:
maximizing the lender’s profit while ensuring that entrepreneurial util-
ity is no less than the maximum utility the rival can provide. Based on
this strategy, at 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥] the entrepreneurial utility implied by lender
1’s  equilibrium  loan  rate 𝑟∗
1(𝑧) should  exactly  match  the  maximum
utility 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟) lender 2 can provide.

As 𝑧 increases in the region [0, ̃𝑥], lender 1’s monitoring efficiency
decreases  relative  to  lender  2’s.  Hence,  lender  1  must  offer  a  lower
1(𝑧) to  match  the  maximum  utility  provided  by  lender  2,  implying
𝑟∗
the  perverse  loan  rate  pattern.  The  implication  of  the  result  is  that
entrepreneurs in the region [0, ̃𝑥] cannot benefit from lender 1’s advan-
tageous monitoring efficiency; instead, lender 1 itself extracts the entire
benefit of its IT advantage over lender 2. Corollary 1 is consistent with
the findings of Herpfer et al. (2022): a bank will charge its borrowers
higher loan rates if the borrowers geographically get closer to the bank
or/and farther away from competing banks.

At the indifference location 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, neither lender has a cost advan-
tage in monitoring, so the intensity of lender competition is maximal
there.  Therefore,  a  lender  must  offer  its  best  loan  rate 𝑟 to  match
the utility provided by the rival lender. Panel 1 of Fig. 3 graphically
illustrates lenders’ equilibrium rates when 𝑞𝑖 > 0.
The case with no distance friction (𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 0). If 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 holds,
the two lenders have the same monitoring efficiency at all locations,
meaning that competition intensity is unboundedly high everywhere. In
this case, every location is an indifference location with both lenders
offering the best loan rate 𝑟, and, by assumption, every entrepreneur
will randomly choose a lender with probability 1∕2. Then, each lender
can obtain half of the market, which is consistent with the limit by
letting 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 tend to 0. Note that in this case, 𝑟∗
2(𝑧) = 𝑟 is also
consistent with the pricing strategies displayed in Proposition 1.26
Investment. The investment 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) of the entrepreneur at 𝑧 is random
and depends on ̃𝐵(𝑧). However, the randomness will disappear if we
average the investment of a positive mass of entrepreneurs, in which
case the expected investment 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] at 𝑧 (based on the distribution of
̃𝐵(𝑧)) matters. The following corollary characterizes how 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] varies
with location.

1(𝑧) = 𝑟∗

Let 𝑞𝑖 > 0 for  some 𝑖 ∈  {1, 2} and 𝑧 ∈  [0, ̃𝑥].  The
Corollary  2.
entrepreneur’s expected investment 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] – which equals 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] – is
decreasing in 𝑧 when 𝑧 is sufficiently close to ̃𝑥. A symmetric result holds
for 𝐸[𝐼2(𝑧)] at 𝑧 ∈ [ ̃𝑥, 1].

26 If 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 =  0 and 𝑐1
≠ 𝑐2 hold, then the lender with better IT-basic
(i.e., higher monitoring efficiency) will drive out the other lender. In this case,
the equilibrium loan rate of the dominant lender still follows the pricing policy
in Proposition 1 and is invariant to 𝑧 because locations do not affect a lender’s
competitive advantage when distance friction is absent.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Fig. 3. Equilibrium loan rates and expected loan volumes for different locations. This figure plots the equilibrium loan rate and expected loan volume against the entrepreneurial
location. The parameter values are 𝑅 = 2.4, 𝐵 = 0.9, 𝑏 = 0.4, 𝑘 = 0.5, 𝑝 = 0.5, 𝑓 = 1, 𝑐1 = 1, 𝑐2 = 1, 𝑞1 = 0.6, and 𝑞2 = 0.6.

As 𝑧 increases in the region [0, ̃𝑥], several competing effects work on
lender 1’s credit limit and hence expected entrepreneurial investment.
First, if 𝑞1 > 0, the direct effect of increasing 𝑧 is to decrease lender
1’s  monitoring  efficiency  (because  of  the  longer  lending  distance),
which tends to reduce 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]. Second, the indirect effect is that 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
decreases (see Corollary 1), which in general has an ambiguous effect
1(𝑧) increases the entrepreneur’s
on 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]. On the one hand, a lower 𝑟∗
skin in the game, making the moral hazard problem less severe and
hence tending to increase 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]; on the other hand, it reduces lender
1’s  skin  in  the  game  and  monitoring  incentive,  tending  to  decrease
𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)].  When 𝑧 is  close  to ̃𝑥,  lender  competition  is  very  intense
1(𝑧) is very close to 𝑟), so the dominant effect of decreasing 𝑟∗
(i.e., 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
is to reduce lender 1’s monitoring incentive, which, together with the
direct effect, leads to a lower 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]. Panel 2 of Fig. 3 illustrates the
result.27

4.  Information technology and lender competition

In  this  section,  we  first  derive  comparative  statics  of  monitoring
parameters on loan rates, lending volumes, and lender profits. Then,
we study the competition between a fintech and a bank.

4.1.  Comparative statics of monitoring parameters

We  analyze  the  comparative  statics  of  (a)  an  individual  lender’s
(e.g., lender 𝑖’s) IT and (b) the lending sector’s IT, with a focus on the
latter. Table 2 summarizes the results. When looking at the lending
sector  (instead  of  an  individual  lender),  we  let 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐 and
𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞 hold and use 𝑞 and 𝑐 to represent the sector’s IT-distance
and IT-basic, respectively.

Information  technology  and  loan  rates. The  following  corollary
analyzes how equilibrium loan rates vary with 𝑐 and 𝑞 (the lending
sector’s IT) in the case 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐 and 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞.

Corollary 3. Let 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐 and 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞. Lender 𝑖’s equilibrium loan
𝑖 (𝑧) = 𝑟) and is not
rate 𝑟∗
affected by 𝑐. If 𝑞 = 0, 𝑟∗

𝑖 (𝑧) is increasing in 𝑞 (except for 𝑧 = 1∕2 where 𝑟∗
𝑖 (𝑧) = 𝑟 holds for all locations.

27 When 𝑧 is not close to ̃𝑥, 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] may be increasing in 𝑧 (i.e., the indirect
effect on 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] may be positive and dominant because the moral hazard
problem  becomes  less  severe).  However,  based  on  our  numerical  analysis,
𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] is increasing in 𝑧 (for 𝑧 not close to ̃𝑥) only when the two lenders are
quite asymmetric. In the symmetric case with 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 and 𝑐1 = 𝑐1, a numerical
study finds that 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] is decreasing in 𝑧 even when 𝑧 is not close to ̃𝑥. This
is in line with the evidence that a bank tends to lend more to firms about
which the bank has better expertise (Blickle et al., 2023; Duquerroy et al.,
2022; Paravisini et al., 2023).

Table 2
Summary of comparative statics.  This table summarizes how endogenous variables (in
the first column) is affected by parameters (in the first row). ‘‘↑’’ (resp. ‘‘↓’’) means that
an endogenous variable is increasing (resp. decreasing) in the corresponding parameter.
‘‘- -’’ means that an endogenous variable is independent of the corresponding parameter.
‘‘↑𝑛𝑢𝑚’’ (resp. ‘‘↓𝑛𝑢𝑚’’) means that an endogenous variable is increasing (resp. decreasing)
in the corresponding parameter based on numerical studies. ‘‘Hump-shaped’’ means the
effect of a parameter increase has a ‘‘positive-then-negative’’ effect on the endogenous
variable.

1(𝑧) at 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥)
𝑟∗
0 𝐼1(𝑧)𝑑 𝑧
∫ ̃𝑥
0 𝜋1(𝑧)𝑑 𝑧
∫ ̃𝑥

𝑞1

𝑐1

↓

↓

↓

↓

↓

↓

𝑞2

↑

𝑐2

↑

𝑞
(𝑞𝑖 = 𝑞, 𝑐𝑖 = 𝑐)

↑

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

↑

↑

hump-shaped
↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

𝑐
(𝑞𝑖 = 𝑞, 𝑐𝑖 = 𝑐)
- -
↓

↓

Corollary 3 highlights a crucial difference between 𝑐 (IT-basic) and 𝑞
(IT-distance). As 𝑞 increases, monitoring costs become more sensitive to
distance, which increases lender differentiation. Higher differentiation
increases  lender  1’s  market  power  at 𝑧 ∈  [0, 1∕2) because  lender
2’s  monitoring  efficiency  is  more  severely  hurt  by  a  higher 𝑞 at  a
location closer to lender 1. A symmetric reasoning applies to lender
2 at 𝑧 ∈  (1∕2, 1]. Hence, both lenders can post higher loan rates for
their respective entrepreneurs as 𝑞 increases. Lender differentiation will
disappear when 𝑞 = 0, implying unbounded competition intensity and
𝑖 (𝑧) = 𝑟 at all locations.28 In contrast, although an increase in 𝑐 makes
𝑟∗
monitoring more costly, lenders’ differentiation is unaffected; hence,
equilibrium loan rates are unaffected.

In sum: unlike increasing 𝑐, increasing 𝑞 not only makes monitoring
more costly but also increases lenders’ differentiation, and the latter
effect  renders  lender  competition  less  intense.  This  result  is  consis-
tent  with D’Andrea  et  al. (2021)  who  find  that  broadband  internet
implementation intensifies bank competition and reduces banks’ loan
price, and Duquerroy et al. (2022) who document that increased branch
specialization in SME lending – which can be viewed as an increase in 𝑞
– substantially curtails the intensity of lending competition.29 Paravisini
et al. (2023) find a similar result in the credit market for export-related
loans.

28 Decreasing 𝑞 is equivalent to shortening the length of the linear city while
increasing the density of entrepreneurs at each location. To see this, consider
that the IT-distance parameter changes from 𝑞 to 𝑞′. Then, for lender 1, the
distance friction at 𝑧 becomes 𝑞′𝑧 = 𝑞(𝑞′𝑧∕𝑞), which can be viewed as a IT-
distance parameter 𝑞 and a lending distance 𝑞′𝑧∕𝑞. That is, after the parameter
change, the city can be viewed as one with a length of 𝑞′∕𝑞 and entrepreneurs
of mass 1, implying that the density of entrepreneurs at each location becomes
𝑞∕𝑞′.
29 As 𝑞 increases, a lender’s knowledge specializes more in nearby locations
and is discounted faster with distance, implying a higher lender specialization.
The loan rate and volume disparity at different locations will increase as a
consequence.

9 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Fig. 4. Information technology and total investment. This figure plots entrepreneurs’ total investment (i.e., lenders’ total loan volume) against 𝑐 and 𝑞. The parameter values are:
𝑅 = 2.4, 𝐵 = 0.9, 𝑏 = 0.4, 𝑝 = 0.5, and 𝑓 = 1 in both panels; 𝑐 = 1 in Panel 1, with 𝑘 = 0.1 for the solid curve and 𝑘 = 0.8 for the dashed curve; 𝑞 = 0.6 and 𝑘 = 0.1 in Panel 2.

Corollary 3 tells us that, when studying how changes in information
technology affect lender competition, we should first specify the type of
IT change.30

The  equilibrium  consequences  of  a  lender’s  IT  improvement  are
quite different from those of a general lending sector’s IT improvement.
Indeed,  a  lender  adopting  better  IT  increases  its  loan  rates  (see  the
effects of 𝑞1 and 𝑐1 on 𝑟∗
1(𝑧) in Table 2), while both lenders’ loan rates
will decrease if the lending sector’s IT-distance improves. A lender’s IT
improvement affects both itself and the other lender’s behavior, giving
rise to a competitive spillover effect. Our model highlights that caution
is necessary when using diff-in-diff methods in empirical research on
technological progress.31

Information  technology  and  lending  volume. Lender  1’s  (resp.
≡
lender 2’s) aggregate loan volume equals 𝐿1
∫ 1
̃𝑥 𝐼2(𝑧)𝑑 𝑧). Although 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) is random, the aggregate lending volume 𝐿𝑖
depends on 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] and is deterministic (e.g., ∫ ̃𝑥
0 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]
𝑑 𝑧) because ̃𝐵(𝑧) is independent across 𝑧. The following proposition
shows how the lending sector’s IT affects lenders’ total lending volume
𝐿1 + 𝐿2, which is also entrepreneurs’ total investment.

0 𝐼1(𝑧)𝑑 𝑧 (resp. 𝐿2

0 𝐼1(𝑧)𝑑 𝑧 = ∫ ̃𝑥

≡ ∫ ̃𝑥

Let 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐 and 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞. Entrepreneurs’ total
Proposition 2.
investment (i.e., 𝐿1 + 𝐿2) is decreasing in 𝑐 while it is increasing in 𝑞 if 𝑞 is
sufficiently small.

Proposition 2 states that the two types of IT have different effects
on  the  market’s  credit  supply.  IT-basic  progress  (i.e.,  decreasing 𝑐)
increases lenders’ lending volume and, hence, total investment because
it  improves  lenders’  monitoring  efficiency  without  intensifying  their
competition. See Panel 2 of Fig. 4 for an illustration. This is consistent
with Ahnert et al. (2024) who find that job creation by young enter-
prises, which is an indirect measure of entrepreneurial investment, is
higher in US counties that are more exposed to IT-intensive banks.

A  decrease  in 𝑞 (IT-distance  progress)  has  more  complex  effects.
First,  it  improves  lenders’  monitoring  efficiency  (as  IT-basic  does),
which tends to increase total investment. Second, it reduces lenders’ dif-
ferentiation and intensifies their competition, decreasing lenders’ loan
rates and generating an ambiguous effect on lenders’ expected credit
limits. When 𝑞 is sufficiently small, lenders’ loan rates will approach
𝑟; in this case, the dominant effect of lowering lenders’ loan rates is
to decrease their monitoring incentives and expected credit limits. In
addition, the speed of loan rate reduction will be unboundedly high

𝑖 that satisfies

30 The  corollary  holds  for  a  more  general  cost  function 𝐶𝑖(𝑚𝑖, 𝑧)  =
𝑔(𝑐𝑖, 𝑞𝑖, 𝑠𝑖)𝑚2
)
𝜕( 𝐶1(𝑚1,𝑧)
𝐶2(𝑚2,𝑧)
𝜕 𝑐

𝜕2( 𝐶1(𝑚1,𝑧)
𝐶2(𝑚2,𝑧)
𝜕 𝑧𝜕 𝑞

= 0  and

> 0,

)

where 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐, 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞, and 𝑔(𝑐𝑖, 𝑞𝑖, 𝑠𝑖) is an increasing function of 𝑐𝑖, 𝑞𝑖
and 𝑠𝑖.
31 Berg et al. (2021) analyze the spillover-induced bias and provide guidance
on how to deal with it.

10 

when 𝑞 is close to 0 because then the intensity of lender competition
will tend to infinity (i.e., lender differentiation will disappear). As a
result, when 𝑞 is very small, lenders’ total lending volume will decrease
as IT-distance improves, although monitoring becomes cheaper.

Fig. 4 illustrates Proposition 2. Decreasing 𝑐 has no differentiation
effect and hence increases total investment unambiguously. Decreasing
𝑞, however, has a ‘‘hump-shaped’’ net effect on investment (see Panel 1
of Fig. 4). When 𝑞 is large, the investment-spurring effects of decreasing
𝑞 are dominant: (a) monitoring becomes cheaper, and (b) lower loan
rates increase entrepreneurs’ skin in the game, reducing the severity
of the moral hazard. However, when 𝑞 is small, the dominant effect
of  decreasing 𝑞 is  reducing  lenders’  monitoring  incentives,  thereby
decreasing total investment. This result is consistent with Di Patti and
Dell’Ariccia (2004), who document that the relationship between bank
competition – which is affected by 𝑞 in our model – and banks’ credit
supply is hump-shaped.

Furthermore, a numerical study finds that increasing 𝑘 will increase
the investment-maximizing level of 𝑞. This can be seen from Panel 1
of Fig. 4: The solid curve (with a low 𝑘) peaks at a lower 𝑞 than the
dashed curve (with a high 𝑘). This is so since a higher 𝑘 implies a higher
ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard, which increases the
need for monitoring to alleviate the problem and make credit avail-
able. Therefore, the provision of monitoring incentives (determined by
lenders’ skin in the game) becomes more important to credit supply and
investment.32 Hence, the differentiation effect of decreasing 𝑞 is more
likely to reduce total investment when 𝑘 is higher.

Information  technology  and  lender  profit. Lender  1’s  aggregate
lending profit from all locations is equal to ∫ ̃𝑥
0 𝜋1(𝑧)𝑑 𝑧; here 𝜋1(𝑧) is
lender  1’s  profit  from  financing  the  entrepreneur  at 𝑧 (see  Eq. (8)).
Symmetrically, we can define lender 2’s aggregate profit. The effects
of  IT  on  lender  profit  are  given  in Table  2.  Although  a  decrease  in
𝑞 (= 𝑞1 = 𝑞2)  implies  cheaper  monitoring,  it  also  reduces  lenders’
differentiation and intensifies their competition. Our numerical study
finds  that  the  differentiation  effect  dominates  and  decreases  lender
profit. In contrast, a decrease in 𝑐 (= 𝑐1 = 𝑐2) has no differentiation
effect and increases lender profit.

The effects of an individual lender’s IT. Table 2 also shows the effects
of 𝑞𝑖 and 𝑐𝑖 (without  the  restriction 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞 or 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐).
As  lender 𝑖’s  IT  improves  –  be  it  IT-basic  (𝑐𝑖)  or  IT-distance  (𝑞𝑖)  –
the lender will have a higher competitive advantage and obtain larger
market share, which increases the lender’s loan rates, aggregate lending
volume, and profit. Meanwhile, higher lender 𝑖’s competitiveness will
force its rival to lower loan rates, lose market share, and make less
profit.

32 Note that entrepreneurs’ skin in the game can alleviate the moral hazard
problem and reduce the need for monitoring, but alone can solve the moral
hazard problem only when it is trivial. Otherwise, credit supply has to rely on
lenders’ monitoring, and a higher potential private benefit will strengthen the
reliance.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Fig. 5. Equilibrium loan rates and volumes under bank-fintech competition. This figure plots the equilibrium loan rate and expected loan volume against the entrepreneurial
location. In Panel 1, the parameter values are 𝑅 = 2.4, 𝐵 = 0.9, 𝑏 = 0.4, 𝑘 = 0.5, 𝑝 = 0.5, 𝑓 = 1, 𝑐1 = 1, 𝑐2 = 1.4, 𝑞1 = 0.6, and 𝑞2 = 0. In Panel 2, lender 𝑖’s marginal funding cost is
𝑓𝑖 (with 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}); the parameter values are 𝑅 = 2.4, 𝐵 = 0.9, 𝑏 = 0.4, 𝑘 = 0.5, 𝑝 = 0.5, 𝑓1 = 1, 𝑓2 = 1.05, 𝑐1 = 1, 𝑐2 = 0.7, 𝑞1 = 0.6, and 𝑞2 = 0.

4.2.  Competition between a bank and a fintech

The difference between a traditional bank and a fintech lender can
be reflected in parameters 𝑞𝑖 and 𝑐𝑖. Compared with banks, fintechs
tend  to  have  better  IT-distance  (i.e.,  lower 𝑞𝑖)  since  they  connect
digitally with entrepreneurs and process information with automatic
algorithms. In contrast, banks may have higher basic monitoring effi-
ciency (i.e., lower 𝑐𝑖) because they usually have better access to firm
information.33

Suppose that lender 1 is a bank with relatively low 𝑐1 (smaller than
𝑐2) and positive 𝑞1, while lender 2 is a fintech with relatively high 𝑐2
(because of lack of data) and 𝑞2 =  0 (uniform capability to monitor
different entrepreneurs). Then, according to Corollary 1, the fintech’s
loan rate is decreasing in its lending distance (i.e., increasing in 𝑧 when
𝑧 ∈ [ ̃𝑥, 1], see Panel 1 of Fig. 5). The reason is that the maximum utility
provided by the bank (i.e., lender 1) is decreasing in 𝑧; to match this
utility, the fintech will increase its loan rate as 𝑧 increases in the region
[ ̃𝑥, 1]. This result is consistent with Butler et al. (2017), who document
that borrowers with better access to bank financing request loans at
lower interest rates on a fintech platform.34 Moreover, note that 𝑐1 < 𝑐2

33 Banks’  advantage  in  the  access  to  customer  data  is  the  rationale  of
the Open Banking initiative launched by several governments, including the
European Union and the United Kingdom. See Babina et al. (2024) and He
et al. (2023).
34 Open banking policy can be viewed as a decrease in 𝑐2 because it improves
customer data availability for the fintech. Based on our model, the decrease
in 𝑐2 (due to open banking) will expand the market area served by lender 2
(fintech). This result is consistent with Babina et al. (2024), who document
that open banking policy significantly enlarges venture capital investment in
fintechs, which can be viewed as a proxy for fintechs’ expansion.

must imply ̃𝑥 > 0, no matter how large the bank’s 𝑞1 is. The reason is
that the bank, with its better access to firm information (which leads
to 𝑐1 < 𝑐2), can ensure that it has higher monitoring efficiency than the
fintech when 𝑧 is sufficiently close to 0. The implication is that although
fintechs,  with  their  advantage  in  IT-distance,  can  bring  competitive
pressure to banks, the latter will not be completely replaced because
of their superior capability of serving certain types of firms.

Heterogeneous funding costs. Banks and fintechs have different fund-
ing  sources  and,  hence,  may  face  heterogeneous  funding  costs.  In
Appendix B, we relax the assumption that the two lenders face the same
marginal funding cost 𝑓 . We find that decreasing a lender’s funding cost
will increase the lender’s skin in the game and expected credit limit,
improving its competitive advantage. As a result, the lender gains a
larger market area (Corollary 5) and increases loan rates and expected
loan  volumes  (Corollary  6).  However,  if  both  lenders’  funding  costs
decrease, their loan rates will decrease (Corollary 7). It follows that if
a policymaker aims to decrease loan rates by reducing lenders’ funding
costs, it should reduce the funding costs for all lenders. Otherwise, some
lenders can exploit larger funding cost advantages and charge higher
loan rates.

With heterogeneous funding costs, lenders’ best loan rates are no
longer the same: The lender with a lower marginal funding cost has a
lower best loan rate (Lemma 4). Suppose that lender 1 is a bank with a
lower marginal funding cost than lender 2 (fintech). At the indifference
location 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, the two lenders offer the same entrepreneurial utility,
but  they  have  different  advantages:  The  bank  has  an  advantage  in
funding costs, while the fintech has an advantage in IT. As a result,
the  equilibrium  loan  rates  and  expected  volumes  are  discontinuous
at the indifference location (Proposition 6). The bank’s funding cost
advantage allows it to offer a lower (best) loan rate at 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, while
the fintech’s IT advantage allows it to provide a higher expected credit
limit to compete with the bank (see Panel 2 of Fig. 5).

11 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Fig. 6. Social welfare and lending sector’s information technology. This figure plots social welfare, entrepreneurial utility, and lenders’ profits against 𝑐 and 𝑞. The parameter
values are: 𝑅 = 2.4, 𝐵 = 0.9, 𝑏 = 0.4, 𝑝 = 0.5 and 𝑓 = 1 in all panels; 𝑐 = 1 in Panels 1 and 3; 𝑞 = 0.4 in Panels 2 and 4; 𝑘 = 0.1 in Panels 1 and 2; and 𝑘 = 0.9 in Panels 3 and 4.

5.  Welfare analysis

In this section, we first analyze how the development and diffusion
of  the  lending  sector’s  information  technology  affect  social  welfare.
Then, we examine the relationship between equilibrium loan rates and
socially optimal ones. Throughout the section, we let 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞 and
𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐, and hence use 𝑞 and 𝑐 to represent the lending sector’s
IT-distance and IT-basic.

If the entrepreneur at location 𝑧 is financed by lender 𝑖 (with 𝑖 ∈

1

𝑊 ≡

{1, 2}), then social welfare is given by
) 𝑑 𝑧
𝐼𝑖 (𝑧) 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
∫
0
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Entrepreneurs’ aggregate utility
(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 )

(

−

1

+ ∫

0

𝐼𝑖 (𝑧)

𝑑 𝑧
.
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Lenders’ total profits

𝑐(𝑚𝑖(𝑧))2
2(1 − 𝑞 𝑠𝑖)

)

(12)

Here 𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑚𝑖(𝑧),  and 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) are  lender 𝑖’s  loan  rate,  monitoring  in-
tensity, and credit limit (i.e., loan volume) for the entrepreneur at 𝑧
̃𝐵(𝑧), 𝑊 is  de-
respectively.  Even  if 𝐼𝑖(𝑧) and 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) are  functions  of
terministic  since ̃𝐵(𝑧) is  independent  across 𝑧.  According  to  Expres-
sion (12), social welfare consists of entrepreneurs’ utility and lenders’
profits, incorporating that lenders’ monitoring prevents entrepreneurs’
shirking.

5.1.  Welfare properties of the symmetric equilibrium

In  this  subsection,  we  analyze  the  welfare  effects  of  information
technology progress. Fig. 6 shows how entrepreneurs’ utility, lenders’
profits,  and  social  welfare  vary  with 𝑞 and 𝑐.  A  decrease  in 𝑞 will
increase  the  intensity  of  lending  competition  because  differentiation
will be diminished (Corollary 3). Greater lender competition (together
with  higher  monitoring  efficiency)  translates  into  lenders  providing
higher entrepreneurial utility. So, as can be seen in Panels 1 and 3 of
Fig. 6, entrepreneurial utility increases if 𝑞 decreases. From the lenders’

12 

perspective, reducing 𝑞 has two opposing effects: a cost-saving effect
since monitoring is cheaper and a differentiation effect, which implies
more intense competition. Our numerical study finds that the differen-
tiation effect dominates, so lenders’ profits decrease as 𝑞 decreases (see
Table 2). Perhaps more surprising is the following result: decreasing 𝑞
reduces social welfare for 𝑞 small enough.

Proposition 3.
while it is decreasing in 𝑐.

Social welfare is increasing in 𝑞 if 𝑞 is sufficiently small

In  general,  the  effect  of 𝑞 on  welfare  is  ambiguous.  Whether  a
reduction  in 𝑞 and  the  resultant  increased  competition  intensity  are
welfare-improving depends on whether we start with a low or high
level of competition (Panels 1 and 3 of Fig. 6). When 𝑞 is high, reducing
𝑞 improves  welfare  for  two  reasons:  First,  a  lower 𝑞 implies  higher
monitoring efficiency in the lending sector (cost-saving effect). Second,
when lender differentiation is high, intensifying lender competition will
significantly alleviate entrepreneurs’ moral hazard and increase their
investment (see Panel 1 of Fig. 4). A potential welfare-reducing effect
also exists: More intense lender competition reduces lenders’ skin in the
game and monitoring incentives. However, the last effect is dominated
when 𝑞 is high.

The story flips when 𝑞 is small enough. In this case, high competition
intensity leaves lenders with very low skin in the game. Then, further
decreasing 𝑞 reduces social welfare because the reduction in lenders’
monitoring  incentives  –  which  decreases  their  willingness  to  allevi-
ate  entrepreneurs’  moral  hazard  and  extend  credit  limits  –  becomes
the dominant effect. Entrepreneurs’ investment rapidly decreases as a
result. More intense lender competition still improves entrepreneurs’
utility (by decreasing the loan rates). In addition, the cost-saving effect
is dominated.35

35 The existence of the lower bound 𝑟 for lenders’ pricing is not an ingredient
driving the result. Social welfare would decrease further if lenders decreased
their loan rates below 𝑟.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

In  contrast,  decreasing 𝑐 unambiguously  improves  social  welfare
since it does not affect lender differentiation (Corollary 3). See Panels
2 and 4 of Fig. 6 for an illustration.

Furthermore, a numerical study finds that increasing 𝑘, the probabil-
̃𝐵(𝑧), will increase the welfare-maximizing
ity of a high realization of
level of 𝑞. This can be seen from Panels 1 and 3 of Fig. 6: In Panel
3, where 𝑘 is higher, social welfare peaks at a higher 𝑞 than in Panel
1. A higher 𝑘 (i.e., higher ex-ante severity of moral hazard) raises the
need for monitoring, increasing the importance of lenders’ monitoring
incentives and their skin in the game for welfare. As a result, IT-distance
progress is more likely to reduce social welfare when ̃𝐵(𝑧) is more likely
to be high.

In short, although reducing 𝑞 (i.e., improving IT-distance) and re-
ducing 𝑐 (i.e., improving IT-basic) can each be viewed as progress in
information technology, their welfare effects are quite different. Hence,
when discussing IT progress, one must stipulate the type of IT involved.

Key model ingredients, competition, and welfare. The result that
reducing  distance  friction  may  harm  welfare  is  driven  by  two  in-
gredients: (a) lender monitoring matters for welfare, and (b) lenders
cannot  commit  ex  ante  to  monitoring  effort  (they  set  credit  limits
and monitoring intensities after entrepreneurs have chosen lenders).
Note that credit limits determine the need for monitoring (Lemma 1).
The second ingredient implies that monitoring is not committed when
lenders post loan rates; instead, it is incentivized by lenders’ skin in
the game determined by loan rate competition. As a result, reducing 𝑞
(when it is already very low) will excessively intensify competition and
reduce lenders’ monitoring incentives, which hurts welfare because of
ingredient (a).36

Endogenous lender locations. In Online Appendix C, we allow lenders
to choose their locations before lending competition happens. We find
that  when 𝑞  > 0,  lenders  choose  different  locations,  implying  the
existence  of  lender  differentiation.  In  addition,  we  find  that  lenders
move  closer  to  each  other  as 𝑞 decreases,  further  reducing  lender
differentiation (without bringing a cost-saving effect). This additional
differentiation effect (i.e., the diminishing distance between lenders)
makes IT-distance progress more likely to cause excessive competition
and  harm  welfare.  In  contrast,  decreasing 𝑐 does  not  affect  lenders’
location choices, so it unambiguously improves welfare.

5.2.  Socially optimal loan rates

In  this  subsection,  we  examine  how  IT  affects  the  relationship

between equilibrium loan rates and socially optimal ones.

Social  planner’s  problem. We  consider  the  case  where  the  social
planner, without observing ̃𝐵(𝑧), can choose the socially optimal loan
rate schedule of lender 𝑖, denoted by {𝑟𝑜
𝑖 (𝑧)}, to maximize social welfare
𝑊 . The other choice variables of lenders and entrepreneurs are deter-
mined in equilibrium for given loan rates; that is, each entrepreneur
approaches  the  lender  that  can  provide  higher  utility,  and  lenders’
monitoring and credit limits are determined as in Lemmas 1 and 2. Note
that shirking is never desirable for the social planner since ̃𝐵(𝑧) < 𝑓 .
The following proposition characterizes the socially optimal loan rates.

Proposition 4. Price discrimination is not efficient. At any location, the
socially optimal loan rate for both lenders is 𝑟𝑜, which is increasing in 𝑘
and independent of 𝑞, 𝑐, and 𝑧, and satisfies 𝑟 < 𝑟𝑜 < 𝑅. The entrepreneur
at 𝑧 ∈ [0, 1∕2) (resp. 𝑧 ∈ (1∕2, 1]) approaches lender 1 (resp. lender 2);
the entrepreneur at 𝑧 =  1∕2 approaches lender 𝑖 (with 𝑖 ∈  {1, 2}) with
probability 1∕2.

36 The  implications  of  our  model  apply  more  generally  than  the  credit
market. Competition among firms (which need not be lenders) can hurt social
welfare if (a) firms’ efforts matter for welfare and (b) firms determine their
efforts after customers have chosen what firm to patronize (i.e., firms cannot
credibly commit to effort ex ante).

From the social point of view, lowering 𝑟𝑜 decreases lenders’ skin
in  the  game  (i.e.,  reducing  their  monitoring  incentives),  potentially
reducing their credit limits and hurting welfare. Yet as 𝑟𝑜 decreases,
entrepreneurs’  skin  in  the  game  will  increase,  making  moral  hazard
less severe and reducing the need for monitoring (Lemma 1), which
tends to improve social welfare. The social planner must balance the
social benefits (less severe moral hazard) and costs (lower monitoring
incentive) of decreasing 𝑟𝑜, leading to the relation 𝑟 < 𝑟𝑜 < 𝑅: At one
extreme, 𝑟 maximizes entrepreneurs’ utility but implies an excessively
low lenders’ monitoring incentives (and also excessively low credit lim-
its). The monopoly loan rate 𝑅 is the other extreme, which maximizes
lenders’ profits and the severity of the entrepreneurs’ moral hazard.

As 𝑘 increases, the ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard
problem becomes higher, increasing the need for lenders’ monitoring to
alleviate the problem and make credit available. Therefore, the social
planner will increase 𝑟𝑜 to give lenders higher monitoring incentives.
Note that 𝑟𝑜 is unaffected by information technology (i.e., 𝑞 or 𝑐)
or the lending distance 𝑠𝑖. The reason is that 𝑟𝑜 controls the efficient
relative  size  of  lender  profit  with  respect  to  entrepreneurial  utility
(i.e., the sharing of the pie), which is a trade-off between the severity
of  moral  hazard  and  lenders’  monitoring  incentives.  Although 𝑞, 𝑐,
and 𝑠𝑖 determine the absolute project value (i.e., the size of the pie),
the welfare-maximizing way to share the pie is independent of those
parameters.

Given that lenders offer 𝑟𝑜, the entrepreneur at 𝑧 ∈ [0, 1∕2) (resp. 𝑧 ∈
(1∕2, 1]) approaches lender 1 (resp. lender 2), while the entrepreneur
at 𝑧 = 1∕2 randomizes her choice. Such choices of entrepreneurs are
efficient for welfare since each location is served by the lender with
(weakly) better monitoring efficiency. Note that at 𝑧 = 1∕2, lender 𝑖’s
equilibrium loan rate is lower than 𝑟𝑜. This is so since the two lenders
have the same monitoring efficiency at 𝑧 = 1∕2, implying unbounded
competition. As a result, the equilibrium loan rate at 𝑧 = 1∕2 always
equals the best loan rate 𝑟 (see Corollary 1), which is excessively low
compared with the socially optimal level 𝑟𝑜. See Panel 1 of Fig. 7 for
an illustration.

Equilibrium  loan  rates  v.s.  socially  optimal  rates. Proposition  4
implies that the ‘‘perverse’’ pattern of lender 𝑖’s equilibrium loan rate
𝑖 (𝑧) (displayed  in Corollary  1)  is  not  efficient.  A  lender  maximizes
𝑟∗
profit instead of social welfare, so it will extract more project value
when it has more market power. Such a strategy does not balance the
severity of moral hazard well with the lender’s monitoring incentive. In
addition, if lenders offer 𝑟𝑜, it is easy to show that lender 𝑖’s expected
credit limit 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] is linearly increasing in (1 − 𝑞 𝑠𝑖)∕𝑐. This aligns with
the  welfare-maximizing  consideration  because  a  higher  monitoring
efficiency corresponds to a higher expected lending volume. In contrast,
in equilibrium, decreasing 𝑞 – which improves both lenders’ monitor-
ing efficiency – may reduce their lending volumes (Proposition 2). A
straightforward policy implication of Proposition 4 is that regulators
can guide lenders’ pricing to improve allocation efficiency by setting 𝑟𝑜
as the reference loan rate for lenders and limiting their ability to price
discriminate based on borrowers’ locations.

≠
Remark (Asymmetric IT). If the two lenders’ IT is asymmetric (i.e., 𝑞1
≠ 𝑐2), the socially optimal loan rate (of both lenders) is still
𝑞2 or/and 𝑐1
equal to 𝑟𝑜 since 𝑟𝑜 is independent of lenders’ IT. Given that both lenders
offer 𝑟𝑜, entrepreneurs’ choices are still efficient from the social point of
view: The entrepreneur at 𝑧 will approach the lender with better IT at
𝑧, or randomize her choice if the two lenders have the same monitoring
efficiency at 𝑧.

For the rest of the section, we still focus on the case 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞 and
𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐. The following corollary shows how the lending sector’s
IT affects the relationship between the equilibrium loan rates and the
socially optimal one.

13 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Fig. 7. Comparing 𝑟∗
𝑐 = 1 in both panels; 𝑞 = 0.6 in Panel 1; 𝑧 = 0.1 in Panel 2.

1(𝑧) and 𝑟𝑜. This figure plots 𝑟∗

1(𝑧) and 𝑟𝑜 against 𝑧 (Panel 1) and 𝑞 (Panel 2). The parameter values are: 𝑅 = 2.4, 𝑓 = 1, 𝐵 = 0.9, 𝑏 = 0.4, 𝑘 = 0.5, 𝑝 = 0.5 and

Fig. 8. Relations between 𝑟∗
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

1(𝑧) and 𝑟𝑜 in 𝑧 × 𝑞 space. This figure compares 𝑟∗

1(𝑧) with 𝑟𝑜 in 𝑧 × 𝑞 space. The parameter values are 𝑅 = 2.4, 𝑐 = 1, 𝑓 = 1, 𝐵 = 0.9, 𝑏 = 0.4, and 𝑝 = 0.5.

Corollary 4. When 𝑞 is sufficiently small, 𝑟∗

𝑖 (𝑧) < 𝑟𝑜 holds for all locations.
As 𝑞 decreases, lender differentiation will be smaller. At any location
served by lender 𝑖, the corresponding increase in competition intensity
will gradually drive the equilibrium loan rate 𝑟∗
𝑖 (𝑧) to the best loan
rate 𝑟, which is lower than the socially optimal level 𝑟𝑜 according to
Proposition  4.  As  a  result, 𝑟∗
𝑖 (𝑧) <  𝑟𝑜 holds  for  all  locations  when
𝑞 is  small  enough;  in  this  case,  lenders’  monitoring  incentives  are
excessively  low  for  all  entrepreneurs.  See  Panel  2  of Fig.  7 for  an
illustration.

Corollary 4 provides an explanation for Proposition 3 from another
angle. When 𝑞 is small enough, equilibrium loan rates deviate below
the socially optimal level at all locations. Then, further decreasing 𝑞
enlarges the deviation, reducing social welfare.

Fig.  8 illustrates  the  relationship  between  lender  1’s  equilibrium
loan rate and 𝑟𝑜 in 𝑧 × 𝑞 space. For all three panels, lender competition
1(𝑧) < 𝑟𝑜 holds) in Region II (the colored
is excessively intense (i.e., 𝑟∗
area). Consistent with our results, 𝑟∗
1(𝑧) is lower than 𝑟𝑜 when 𝑞 is small
or 𝑧 is close to 1∕2.

A numerical study finds that as 𝑘 increases, Region II will become
larger  in 𝑧 × 𝑞 space  (Comparing  the  three  panels  of Fig.  8 for  an
illustration), which means IT-distance progress is more likely to induce
excessive  lender  competition.  The  intuition  is  that  increasing 𝑘 will
raise the need for monitoring, so lenders’ skin in the game (i.e., moni-
toring incentives) will be more important for welfare. Then, decreasing
lender  differentiation  (through  reducing 𝑞)  can  more  easily  induce
𝑖 (𝑧) < 𝑟𝑜.
𝑟∗
Regulator control of rates and credit limits. In Online Appendix D,
we analyze the case where the social planner determines both loan rates
and credit limits. We find that the social planner will choose 𝑟 – the
best loan rate given in Lemma 3 – and set high credit limits. The social

planner would like to alleviate entrepreneurs’ moral hazard using a low
loan rate and increase total project values by setting high credit limits.
In this case, the planner-chosen loan rate 𝑟, like 𝑟𝑜, is independent of
𝑞, 𝑐, and 𝑠𝑖. However, the credit limit chosen by the social planner at 𝑧
does depend on those parameters: It is linearly increasing in (1 −𝑞 𝑠𝑖)∕𝑐 –
with 𝑠𝑖 = 𝑧 (resp. 𝑠𝑖 = 1 −𝑧) if 𝑖 = 1 (resp. 𝑖 = 2) – since the social planner
would like lender 𝑖 to provide more loans if its IT improves. Therefore,
implementing the optimal regulator control of rates and credit limits
requires the social planner to observe lenders’ IT at each location.

6.  Conclusion

Our  study  shows  that  whether  the  development  of  information
technology  intensifies  lender  competition  depends  on  its  impact  on
differentiation. If IT progress in the lending sector is of type IT-basic
– reducing the costs of monitoring an entrepreneur without altering
lenders’  relative  cost  advantage  (i.e.,  lower 𝑐)  –  then  neither  differ-
entiation  nor  competition  among  lenders  is  affected;  hence,  lenders
will  be  more  profitable  and  provide  more  loans.  Yet,  if  the  indus-
try’s IT progress is of type IT-distance – weakening the influence of
lender–entrepreneur distance on monitoring costs (i.e., lower 𝑞) – then
differentiation among lenders will decrease, competition will become
more intense, and lenders may become less profitable. The effect of IT-
distance progress on entrepreneurs’ total investment is hump-shaped
(Proposition 2 and Fig. 4). IT-distance progress is more likely to reduce
investment when the ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard
problem is higher (i.e., 𝑘 is higher). Therefore, we should be careful to
identify the kind of information technology change being considered
before gauging its impact.

14 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

Consistently with received empirical evidence, we have the testable
implication that a technologically more advanced lender – regardless
of  how  changes  in  IT  affect  lender  differentiation  –  lends  to  more
industries/locations, commands greater market power, and has a larger
aggregate lending volume. We also find that a lender’s loan rate will
increase after the lender’s IT improves relative to other lenders’. See
Proposition 1, Corollary 1, and Table 2.

The welfare effect of information technology progress is ambiguous
when it is of type IT-distance. On the one hand, higher competition
intensity and better IT always favor entrepreneurs and alleviate their
moral  hazard;  on  the  other  hand,  lower  lender  differentiation  can
reduce lenders’ profits, monitoring incentives, and willingness to extend
credit limits. Whether or not an improvement in lenders’ IT-distance
benefits  social  welfare  depends  on  whether  the  lending  market  has
insufficient  or  too  much  competition  at  the  outset.  When 𝑞 is  low,
there is always excessive competition and insufficient monitoring in-
centives (Proposition 3). IT-distance progress is more likely to induce
excessive competition and harm welfare when the ex-ante severity of
entrepreneurs’ moral hazard is higher (see Figs. 6 and 8). The market
may over- or under-shoot the welfare optimal rate. It will tend to under-
shoot – implying that the market under-provides monitoring – when
lender  competition  is  very  intense  (Proposition  4 and  its  corollary).
Finally,  we  find  that  price  discrimination  is  inefficient  and  that  a
regulator could improve welfare by imposing a uniform reference loan
rate.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Xavier Vives: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Zhiqiang Ye: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Xavier Vives reports financial support was provided by Spain Ministry
of  Science  and  Innovation.  Xavier  Vives,  Academic  Director  of  the
Banking Initiative at IESE Business School. If there are other authors,
they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work
reported in this paper.

Appendix A.  Proofs

Proof of Lemmas 1 and 2. After observing ̃𝐵(𝑧), if lender 𝑖 chooses
𝑚𝑖(𝑧) < 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧))), the entrepreneur at 𝑧 will shirk; in this
case, providing loans to the entrepreneur cannot bring a non-negative
profit  to  the  lender.  Hence, 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) ≥ 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧))) must
hold. Obviously, choosing 𝑚𝑖(𝑧) > 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧))) is strictly
dominated by choosing 𝑚𝑖(𝑧)  = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧))) because the
latter is sufficient to prevent shirking.

With 𝑚𝑖(𝑧)  = 𝐼𝑖(𝑧)( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧))), maximizing 𝜋𝑖 (𝑧) (Eq. (8))

yields Lemma 2.

Proof of Lemma 3.
In this proof, we take as given that lender 𝑖’s
monitoring intensity and credit limit at 𝑧 are as given in Lemmas 1 and
2. According to Eqs. (9) and (10),  if the entrepreneur at 𝑧 borrows
from  lender 𝑖 at  the  loan  rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)  ∈ [0, 𝑅],  her  expected  utility
𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) equals
∕𝑐𝑖

)
) 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
, with

1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖

((

)

𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

) ≡

𝑘 (𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 ) 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
(𝐵 − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

))2

+

(1 − 𝑘)

(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 ) 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
(𝑏 − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

))2

.

(A.1)

[

𝑉 ′ (𝑅) = 𝑘 𝑝(𝑓 −𝑝𝑅)

, while 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

Note that 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

(𝐵−(𝑝𝑅−𝑓 ))2 + (1 − 𝑘)

) ≤ 0 when 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈

Maximizing 𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) (by choosing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) is equivalent to maxi-
mizing 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
. Since 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
is not a function of 𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, or 𝑠𝑖, the best
loan rate 𝑟 must be independent of 𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, and 𝑠𝑖.
0, 𝑓 ∕𝑝]

) > 0
when 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈ (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅). Hence, we need only consider 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈ (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅)
when determining the utility-maximizing loan rate 𝑟. We can show that
⎧
𝑉 ′ (𝑓 ∕𝑝) = 𝑘 𝑝(𝑝𝑅−𝑓 )
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
so there exists at least one 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) (in the interval (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅)) that solves
)
𝑉 ′ (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
= 0. Next, we need to check the second-order condition. Note
that 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
= 𝑘𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝐵)
)
with the function 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
) ≡
𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)

𝑝(𝑝𝑅−𝑓 )
(𝑏−(𝑝𝑅−𝑓 ))2 > 0
< 0

+ (1 − 𝑘)𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑏) ,

= 𝐸 [𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)

defined as follows:

can be written as

+ (1 − 𝑘) 𝑝(𝑓 −𝑝𝑅)

̃𝐵(𝑧) ∈ {𝐵 , 𝑏} .

(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 ) 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
))2
( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

)]

𝐵2

𝑏2

,

,

If 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)
)
for a given ̃𝐵(𝑧), then 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

is a concave function of 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) (in the interval (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅))
must be concave in the interval (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅).

We can show that
(𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)

) ≡

𝜕2𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)2

𝑣11

=

)
𝜓 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

))4

,

.

= 2𝑝3 (

is  determined  by  that  of 𝜓

𝜕 𝜓(𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧))
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
𝜓 (𝑓 ∕𝑝, ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)
𝜓 (𝑅, ̃𝐵(𝑧)

with the function 𝜓 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)
(( ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)2
) ≡ −2𝑝2
𝜓 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)

defined as follows:
)
)
(𝑓 − 𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
+ 2 ̃𝐵(𝑧)
+𝑝 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑅)
(𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 )
)
(𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
Note  that  the  sign  of 𝑣11
)
(𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
. With Inequality (3), we can show that
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
Therefore, for a given ̃𝐵(𝑧), 𝜓 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
) < 0 must hold in the interval
) < 0 also holds in this interval.
(𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
(𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅), which means 𝑣11
)
As a result, 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
is a concave function of 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) (in the interval
(𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅)) for a given ̃𝐵(𝑧), so 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
)
must be concave in the interval
)
(𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅). Then, the solution to 𝑉 ′ (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
=  0 must be unique in this
interval. This unique solution (denoted by 𝑟) is the best loan rate.

2 ̃𝐵(𝑧) + 𝑓 − 𝑝𝑅) > 0
− (𝑓 − 𝑝𝑅)2)
(( ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)2
= −2𝑝2
= −2 ̃𝐵(𝑧)𝑝2 ( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 2 (𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 )

< 0
) < 0

)

.

Let 𝑟𝐵 ∈ (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅) denote the solution to 𝜕 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝐵)

∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) = 0, and
∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) = 0. It is easy to

𝑟𝑏 ∈ (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅) denote the solution to 𝜕 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑏)
check that
𝑟𝑏 = 𝑅 −

< 𝑅 −

𝐵 (𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 )
𝑝 (2𝐵 + 𝑓 − 𝑝𝑅)

𝑏 (𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 )
𝑝 (2𝑏 + 𝑓 − 𝑝𝑅)

= 𝑟𝐵.

Since 𝑟 satisfies
𝑉 ′ (𝑟)

= 𝑘

𝜕 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝐵)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

|
|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟

+ (1 − 𝑘)

𝜕 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑏)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

|
|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟

= 0,

it must hold that

𝑟𝑏 < 𝑟 < 𝑟𝐵,

𝜕 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝐵)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

|
|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟

> 0 and

𝜕 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑏)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

|
|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟

< 0.

Then, according to the concavity of 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)
, as 𝑘 increases, 𝑟 must
increase to keep 𝑉 ′ (𝑟)

= 0 holding.

15 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Next,  we  look  at  the  monopoly  loan  rate.  Before ̃𝐵(𝑧) becomes
observable,  lender 𝑖’s  ex-ante  expected  profit  from  serving  the  en-
trepreneur at 𝑧 is 𝐸[𝜋𝑖 (𝑧)]. It can be shown that
[
𝜕 𝐸[𝜋𝑖 (𝑧)]
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

𝑝 (𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 ) ( ̃𝐵(𝑧) + 𝑓 − 𝑝𝑅)
( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)))3

1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖
𝑐𝑖

(A.2)

𝐸

=

]

,

which is positive for 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈ (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅]
because ̃𝐵(𝑧) + 𝑓 − 𝑝𝑅 > 0 (see
Inequality (3)). The lender will never choose 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ≤ 𝑓 ∕𝑝; otherwise,
its profit from serving the entrepreneur at 𝑧 is negative. Hence, the
monopoly loan rate is 𝑅, which maximizes 𝐸[𝜋𝑖 (𝑧)].

Proof  of Proposition  1 and Corollary  1. First,  we  determine  the
cut-off  (indifference)  location.  Because  the  two  lenders  compete  in
a  localized  Bertrand  fashion,  both  lenders  will  offer  their  best  loan
rate 𝑟 at the indifference location; meanwhile, the entrepreneur at the
location feels indifferent. So we have the following equation for the
indifference location ̃𝑥:
1 − 𝑞1 ̃𝑥
𝑉 (𝑟)
𝑐1

1 − 𝑞2 (1 − ̃𝑥)
𝑐2

𝑉 (𝑟) ,

=

where the function 𝑉 (⋅) is defined by Eq. (A.1) in the proof of Lemma 3.
Solving the equation yields the ̃𝑥 displayed in Proposition 1. At the
point ̃𝑥, neither lender has a competitive advantage. On the left (resp.
right) side of ̃𝑥, lender 1 (resp. lender 2) will have an advantage in the
competition with its rival. Hence, if 0 <  ̃𝑥 < 1, entrepreneurs in [0, ̃𝑥)
are served by lender 1, while those in ( ̃𝑥, 1] are served by lender 2.

At  location 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥),  lender  1  must  offer  a  loan  rate 𝑟1 (𝑧) to
maximize its own profit from this location, subject to the constraint
that  the  entrepreneur  at 𝑧’s  utility  is  no  less  than 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟).
Recall that lender 1’s monopoly loan rate is 𝑅, which leaves 0 profit
to the entrepreneur. Lender 1’s optimal choice is to set 𝑟1 (𝑧) as high as
possible, implying Eq. (11). Similarly, lender 2’s equilibrium loan rate
2 (𝑧) at 𝑧 ∈ ( ̃𝑥, 1] is determined by:
𝑟∗
𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑟∗
2 (𝑧)) = 𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟).
At the indifference location 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 −𝑧, 𝑟) = 𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑟) holds,
so the two lenders both offer 𝑟 and provide the same entrepreneurial
utility. As a result, the entrepreneur at 𝑧 = ̃𝑥 will randomly choose a
lender with probability 1/2.

When 𝑟∗
1 (𝑧) since 𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗
𝑟∗
[0, ̃𝑥], the left-hand side of Eq. (11) will decrease for a given 𝑟∗
the right-hand side will increase; hence, 𝑟∗
Eq. (11) holding.

1 (𝑧) ∈ [𝑟, 𝑅], the left-hand side of Eq. (11) is decreasing in
1 (𝑧) ∈ (𝑟, 𝑅]. If 𝑧 increases in the region
1 (𝑧), while
1 (𝑧) must decrease to keep

) < 0 for 𝑟∗

1 (𝑧)

In  equilibrium,  we  can  write 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] (with

Proof  of Corollary  2.
𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥]) as follows:

𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] =

1 − 𝑞1𝑧
𝑐1

𝑉 (𝑟∗
)
1(𝑧)
𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗

1(𝑧)

) ,

where the function 𝑉 (⋅) is defined by Eq. (A.1) in the proof of Lemma 3.

It can be shown that the following equations hold:
𝜕 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
𝜕 𝑧

𝑉 (𝑟∗
+ 𝑞1
𝑐1
)
𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗
1(𝑧)

𝑐1
1 − 𝑞1𝑧

)
1(𝑧)

𝑉 (𝑟)

and

𝑞2
𝑐2

=

𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]
𝜕 𝑧

= −

𝑞1
𝑐1

𝑉 (𝑟∗
)
1(𝑧)
𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗

)
1(𝑧)
(𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗

1−𝑞1𝑧
𝑐1

+

)
)
1(𝑧)

1(𝑧)
+𝑝𝑉 (𝑟∗

) 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗
)
1(𝑧)
))2

(𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗

1(𝑧)

𝜕 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
𝜕 𝑧

.

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

(A.3)

(A.4)

(A.5)

positive when 𝑟∗

1

(𝑧) is close to 𝑟 since 𝑉 ′(𝑟)=0

As 𝑧 approaches ̃𝑥, 𝑟∗
Meanwhile, because of the concavity of 𝑉 (𝑟∗

1(𝑧) – which is higher than 𝑟 – will approach 𝑟.
) < 0 holds
, 𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗
)
1(𝑧)

1(𝑧)

16 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

1(𝑧) > 𝑟. Hence, 𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗

)
will approach 0 from the negative side
when 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
as 𝑧 approaches ̃𝑥. Then, according to Eq. (A.4), lim𝑧→ ̃𝑥− 𝜕 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)∕𝜕 𝑧 =
−∞ holds  when 𝑞𝑖 > 0 holds  for  some 𝑖 ∈  {1, 2}.  As  a  result,
lim𝑧→ ̃𝑥− 𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]∕𝜕 𝑧 = −∞ according to Eq. (A.5).

Proof of Corollary 3. At 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥], Eq. (11) can be written as:
𝑉 (𝑟∗

𝑉 (𝑟)

=

)
1(𝑧)

𝑐1
𝑐2

1 − 𝑞2 (1 − 𝑧)
1 − 𝑞1𝑧

(A.6)

[𝑟, 𝑅]
The left-hand side of Eq. (A.6) is decreasing in 𝑟∗
.
If 𝑐1∕𝑐2 or (1 − 𝑞2(1 − 𝑧))∕(1 − 𝑞1𝑧) marginally decreases, the right-hand
1 (𝑧) must increase to keep Eq.
side of Eq. (A.6) will decrease; hence, 𝑟∗
(A.6) holding.

1 (𝑧) when 𝑟∗

1 (𝑧) ∈

If 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞 and 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐,  obviously  the  right-hand
1 (𝑧).  At 𝑧 ∈  [0, 1∕2),
1 (𝑧) is increasing in

side  of  Eq.  (A.6) is  independent  of 𝑐,  so  is 𝑟∗
(1 − 𝑞 (1 − 𝑧)) ∕ (1 − 𝑞 𝑧) is decreasing in 𝑞. Hence, 𝑟∗
𝑞 at 𝑧 ∈ [0, 1∕2). At 𝑧 = 1∕2, 𝑟∗

1 (𝑧) = 𝑟 according to Corollary 1.

Proof  of Proposition  2. We  make  the  convention  that  the  SLLN
holds for a continuum of independent random variables with uniformly
bounded variances (see Vives, 2010). Since ̃𝐵(𝑧) is independent across
𝑧, 𝐿1 is equal to ∫ ̃𝑥
0 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]𝑑 𝑧 almost surely. With 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐 and
𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞, it holds that ̃𝑥 =  1∕2 and 𝐿1 = 𝐿2, so we focus on 𝐿1
in the proof. It can be shown that 𝜕 𝐿1∕𝜕 𝑐 = ∫ 1∕2
𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]∕𝜕 𝑐 𝑑 𝑧. Since
1 (𝑧) is independent of 𝑐, 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] must be decreasing in 𝑐 according to
𝑟∗
Lemma 2. Hence, 𝐿1 is decreasing in 𝑐.

As for the effect of 𝑞, we also have 𝜕 𝐿1∕𝜕 𝑞 = ∫ 1∕2

𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]∕𝜕 𝑞 𝑑 𝑧.
According to Eqs. (11) and (A.3), we can derive the following equa-
tions:

0

0

𝜕 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
𝜕 𝑞

=

𝑧𝑉

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

)
−(1−𝑧)𝑉 (𝑟)
(

)

(

𝑟∗
(𝑧)
1
(1−𝑞 𝑧)𝑉 ′

𝑟∗
(𝑧)
1
0 for 𝑧 = 1
2

for 𝑧 ∈

[
0, 1∕2)

and

𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]
𝜕 𝑞

= −

𝑧
𝑐

+

𝑉 (𝑟∗
)
1(𝑧)
𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗
1−𝑞 𝑧
𝑐

)
1(𝑧)
(𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗

)
)
1(𝑧)

1(𝑧)
+𝑝𝑉 (𝑟∗

) 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗
)
1(𝑧)
))2

(𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗

1(𝑧)

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

(A.7)

(A.8)

𝜕 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
𝜕 𝑞

.

positive when 𝑟∗
1

(𝑧) is close to 𝑟 since 𝑉 ′(𝑟)=0

− (1 − 𝑧) 𝑉 (𝑟) < 0 at 𝑧 ∈

1(𝑧)∕𝜕 𝑞 =  +∞ must hold when 𝑧 ∈

1(𝑧) will be very close to 𝑟, implying
When 𝑞 is sufficiently close to 0, 𝑟∗
[
that lim𝑞→0 𝑧𝑉 (𝑟∗
)
0, 1∕2).  Therefore,
1(𝑧)
)
lim𝑞→0 𝜕 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
will approach 0 from the negative side as 𝑞 approaches 0. As a result,
lim𝑞→0 𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]∕𝜕 𝑞 = +∞ must hold when 𝑧 ∈
0, 1∕2). When 𝑧 = 1∕2,
1(𝑧)∕𝜕 𝑞 = 0 holds, so 𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(1∕2)]∕𝜕 𝑞 is finite according to Eq. (A.8).
𝜕 𝑟∗
Therefore,

0, 1∕2) since 𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗
[

[

1∕2

𝜕 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]∕𝜕 𝑞 𝑑 𝑧 = +∞.

lim
𝑞→0 ∫
That is, 𝐿1 is increasing in 𝑞 if 𝑞 is sufficiently small.

0

Proof  of Proposition  3. We  make  the  convention  that  the  SLLN
holds for a continuum of independent random variables with uniformly
bounded variances. Since the two lenders are symmetric and ̃𝐵(𝑧) is
independent across 𝑧, we can use function 𝑉 (⋅) – which is defined by
Eq. (A.1) in the proof of Lemma 3 – to rewrite the equilibrium social
welfare 𝑊 as follows:
1 − 𝑞 𝑧
𝑐

) 𝑑 𝑧 + 2∫

1 − 𝑞 𝑧
2𝑐

) 𝑉 (𝑟∗

) 𝑑 𝑧
.

𝑉 (𝑟∗

(𝑝𝑟∗
𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗

1(𝑧) − 𝑓 )
1(𝑧)

2 ∫
0

1(𝑧)

1(𝑧)

1∕2

1∕2

0

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

Since 𝑐 does not affect 𝑟∗

=∫ 1∕2
0
1(𝑧), obviously 𝑊 is decreasing in 𝑐.

𝐸[𝜋1(𝑧)]𝑑 𝑧

X. Vives and Z. Ye

As for effect of 𝑞, it can be shown that
)

(

1∕2

𝜕 𝑊
𝜕 𝑞

= − ∫

0

2𝑧
𝑐

1 +

1
2

𝑉 (𝑟∗

1(𝑧)

) 𝑑 𝑧

(𝑝𝑟∗
1(𝑧) − 𝑓 )
)
𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
)
(
𝑟∗
(𝑧)
1
)2

(𝑝𝑅−𝑓 )𝑉

1−𝑞 𝑧
𝑐

(
𝑝

(𝑧)
)

+ 1−𝑞 𝑧

𝑅−𝑟∗
1
(𝑧)−𝑓

⎞
⎛
⎟
⎜
⎜
⎟
(
2𝑝𝑅−𝑝𝑟∗
⎟
⎜
1
⎟
⎜
(
𝑝
⎠
⎝
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
positive when 𝑟∗
1

𝑅−𝑟∗
1

𝑉 ′
)

𝑟∗
1

(𝑧)

(𝑧)

)

(

𝑐

1∕2

+ ∫
0

𝜕 𝑟∗
1(𝑧)
𝜕 𝑞

𝑑 𝑧

(𝑧) is close to 𝑟 since 𝑉 ′(𝑟 )=0
)
As 𝑞 approaches 0, 𝑟∗
will approach 0.
1(𝑧)
1(𝑧)∕𝜕 𝑞 = +∞ for 𝑧 < 1∕2 (see the Proof
Meanwhile, recall that lim𝑞→0 𝜕 𝑟∗
of Proposition  2),  so lim𝑞→0 𝜕 𝑊 ∕𝜕 𝑞 =  +∞ must  hold.  Hence,  social
welfare is increasing in 𝑞 if 𝑞 is sufficiently small.

1(𝑧) will approach 𝑟, so 𝑉 ′ (𝑟∗

Proof of Proposition 4. Note that controlling lenders’ loan rates allows
the social planner to determine which lender serves a certain location.
For  example,  if  the  social  planner  does  not  want  lender  1  to  serve
location 𝑧, it can simply let 𝑟1(𝑧) = 𝑅; then the entrepreneur at 𝑧 will
[𝑟, 𝑅)
approach lender 2 for any 𝑟2(𝑧) ∈
.
Assume that lender 𝑖 serves location 𝑧. Since ̃𝐵(𝑧) is independent
across 𝑧, maximizing social welfare 𝑊 (by choosing 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ) is equivalent
to maximizing the sum of the ex-ante expected entrepreneurial utility
and expected lender profit at 𝑧, which equals:
)
𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected entrepreneur utility at 𝑧

𝐸[𝜋𝑖 (𝑧)]
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
expected lender 𝑖’s profit at 𝑧

1 − 𝑞 𝑠𝑖
𝑐

𝑊𝑧

≡

+

.

In the proof of Lemma 3, we have shown that 𝜕 𝐸[𝜋𝑖 (𝑧)]∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) > 0
for 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈ (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅]
≤ 0 holds
0, 𝑓 ∕𝑝]
[
, meaning
when 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈
that the social planner will only consider the interval (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅]
when
determining the socially optimal loan rate 𝑟𝑜

. Meanwhile, it is easy to check that 𝑊𝑧
and 𝑊𝑧 > 0 holds when 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈ (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅]

𝑖 (𝑧).

𝑊𝑧 =

(

1 − 𝑞 𝑠𝑖
𝑐

Note that 𝑊𝑧 can be written as:
(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 )
)
𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
independent of 𝑞, 𝑐, and 𝑠𝑖

)
)
) 𝑉 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

1
2

+

,

so the loan rate maximizing 𝑊𝑧 is independent of 𝑞, 𝑐, and 𝑠𝑖, implying
𝑟𝑜
𝑖 (𝑧) = 𝑟𝑜 (which does not depend on 𝑖 or 𝑧).
= 0 and 𝑉 ′ (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

) > 0 for 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈

Since 𝑉 ′ (𝑟)

, it must hold

(𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑟)

that
𝜕 𝐸[𝜋𝑖 (𝑧)]
𝜕 𝑊𝑧
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
Therefore, 𝑟𝑜 > 𝑟 must hold. We can further rewrite 𝑊𝑧 as follows:

> 0 when 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ∈

1 − 𝑞 𝑠𝑖
𝑐

)
𝑉 ′ (𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

(𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑟] .

+

=

1 − 𝑞 𝑠𝑖
𝑐

(𝑘𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝐵)

+ (1 − 𝑘) 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑏))

𝑊𝑧 =
)
with the function 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
defined as follows:
)
(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 ) 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

+

2

𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)

) ≡

2( ̃𝐵(𝑧) − 𝑝(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)))2

(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓 )2

.

∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) = 0, and 𝑟𝑜
∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) = 0. It is easy to check that
(𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 )2
𝐵 𝑝

)
Following proof of Lemma 3 (see how we show that 𝑣 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
is a
concave function of 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) ), we can show that 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)
is a concave
function of 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) in the interval (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅]
for a given ̃𝐵(𝑧). Hence, 𝑊𝑧
is a concave function of 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) in the interval (𝑓 ∕𝑝, 𝑅]
. Let 𝑟𝑜
𝐵 denote
the solution to 𝜕 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝐵)
𝑏 denote the solution to
𝜕 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑏)
𝑟𝑜
𝑏 = 𝑅 −
Then, according to the concavity of 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), ̃𝐵(𝑧)
)
, we must have
𝜕 𝑊𝑧
𝜕 𝑊𝑧
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)
implying that 𝑟𝑜 is unique solution to 𝜕 𝑊𝑧∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)  =  0 in the interval
)
(𝑟𝑜
. When 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) = 𝑟𝑜, the following inequalities must hold:

(𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓 )2
𝑏𝑝

|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟𝑜
𝐵

|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟𝑜
𝑏

𝐵 < 𝑅.

> 0 and

< 𝑅 −

= 𝑟𝑜

< 0,

𝑏, 𝑟𝑜

𝐵

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

𝜕 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝐵)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

|
|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟𝑜

> 0 and

𝜕 𝑤 (𝑟𝑖(𝑧), 𝑏)
𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

|
|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖(𝑧)=𝑟𝑜

< 0.

Then, as 𝑘 increases, 𝜕 𝑊𝑧∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) will shift upward, so 𝑟𝑜 must increase
to keep 𝜕 𝑊𝑧∕𝜕 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) = 0 holding.

When  the  two  lenders  post  the  same  loan  rate 𝑟𝑜,  obviously  the
entrepreneur at 𝑧 ∈  [0, 1∕2) (resp. 𝑧 ∈  (1∕2, 1]) approaches lender 1
(resp. lender 2); the entrepreneur at 𝑧 = 1∕2 approaches lender 𝑖 (with
𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}) with probability 1∕2.

Proof of Corollary 4. Since lim𝑞→0 𝑟∗
𝑖 (𝑧) < 𝑟𝑜 holds for all locations when 𝑞 is sufficiently small.
𝑟∗

𝑖 (𝑧) = 𝑟 holds for any value of 𝑧,

Appendix B.  Heterogeneous funding costs

Summary. In  this  appendix,  we  let  the  two  lenders  face  different
marginal funding costs. Then, lenders’ best loan rates are no longer the
same; the lender with a lower marginal funding cost has a lower best
loan rate. Reducing a lender’s marginal funding cost will increase its
competitive advantage, extending its market share and raising its loan
rates and expected lending volumes. In contrast, reducing both lenders’
marginal funding costs will decrease their loan rates. At the indifference
location, both lenders offer their best loan rates and provide the same
entrepreneurial utility. However, the curve of equilibrium loan rates is
discontinuous at the indifference location when lenders face heteroge-
neous funding costs (see Panel 2 of Fig. 5): The lender with a lower
marginal funding cost – which can be viewed as a bank with access to
cheap funding (e.g., deposits) – offers a lower (best) loan rate because
of its advantage in funding costs. In contrast, its rival (which can be
viewed as a fintech lender with a more expensive funding source) has
an advantage in IT and provides a larger expected loan volume at the
indifference location.

Model setup. In the main text, we assume that the two lenders face
the same marginal funding cost 𝑓 when providing loans, which does not
consider the possibility that different types of lenders may face different
funding costs (e.g., banks v.s. fintechs). In this appendix, we consider
this possibility by assuming that lender 𝑖’s (with 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}) marginal
funding cost is 𝑓𝑖. Now, we modify Inequality (3) of the main text to
̃𝐵(𝑧) ≥ 2(𝑝𝑅 − 𝑓𝑖),  𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}
to ensure that the moral hazard problem is non-trivial. All the other
assumptions of the main text still apply.

(B.1)

Now, lender 𝑖 faces a marginal funding cost of 𝑓𝑖 (instead of 𝑓 ), so

Lemma 3 of the main text should be modified as follows.

Lemma 4. At any location, lender 𝑖’s best loan rate, denoted by 𝑟𝑖, is
increasing in 𝑘 and 𝑓𝑖, independent of 𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, and 𝑠𝑖, and within the interval
(𝑓𝑖∕𝑝, 𝑅)
. Lender 𝑖’s monopoly loan rate is 𝑅. Lender 𝑖 will offer loan rates
within the interval [𝑟𝑖, 𝑅].

Generally speaking, Lemma 4 is consistent with Lemma 3. Lemma 4
further shows that a lender’s best loan rate is increasing in its marginal
funding  cost.  Everything  else  being  equal,  a  higher 𝑓𝑖 will  decrease
lender 𝑖’s skin in the game 𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓𝑖, weakening its monitoring incen-
tive. Hence, the best loan rate must increase to alleviate the decrease in
lender 𝑖’s skin in the game, ensuring that its monitoring incentive will
not decrease by too much. According to Lemma 4, lenders’ best loan
rates need not be the same in this appendix. Therefore, lender 𝑖’s best
loan rate, 𝑟𝑖, has a subscript “𝑖’’.
Equilibrium loan rates. If an entrepreneur at 𝑧 borrows from lender 𝑖
at the loan rate 𝑟𝑖(𝑧), her expected utility is equal to
𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖, 𝑓𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)) ≡ 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)]𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

(B.2)

) ,

17 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

where 𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] is equal to

𝐸[𝐼𝑖(𝑧)] =

(

1 − 𝑞𝑖𝑠𝑖
𝑐𝑖

)

𝑘 (𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓𝑖
(𝐵 − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

))2

+

(𝑝𝑟𝑖(𝑧) − 𝑓𝑖
(1 − 𝑘)
))2
(𝑏 − 𝑝 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖(𝑧)

)

)

.

(B.3)

Obviously, the maximum utility lender 𝑖 can provide at 𝑧 is 𝑈 (𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝑠𝑖,
𝑓𝑖, 𝑟𝑖). If lender 1 wants to attract the entrepreneur at 𝑧, it must offer a
loan rate weakly more attractive than the best loan rate 𝑟2 of lender 2
(that is, providing expected utility no less than 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑓2, 𝑟2)). If
lender 1 cannot do so, then the entrepreneur will be served by lender 2
instead. Reasoning in this way yields the following result.

Proposition 5. Let the following inequalities hold:
𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 0, 𝑓1, 𝑟1) > 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1, 𝑓2, 𝑟2) and
𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 1, 𝑓1, 𝑟1) < 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 0, 𝑓2, 𝑟2).

(B.4)

There exists a unique ̃𝑥 ∈ (0, 1) such that entrepreneurs located in [0, ̃𝑥)
(resp. ( ̃𝑥, 1])  are  served  by  lender  1  (resp.  lender  2).  At 𝑧 = ̃𝑥,  the
entrepreneur is served by lender 𝑖 (with 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}) with probability 1∕2.
1(𝑧), is the unique
At 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥], lender 1’s equilibrium loan rate schedule, 𝑟∗
solution (in interval [𝑟1, 𝑅]) of
𝑈 (𝑞1, 𝑐1, 𝑧, 𝑓1, 𝑟∗

1(𝑧)) = 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑓2, 𝑟2)
At 𝑧 ∈ [ ̃𝑥, 1], lender 2’s equilibrium loan rate schedule, 𝑟∗
in a symmetric way in the interval [𝑟2, 𝑅].

2(𝑧), is determined

(B.5)

Condition (B.4) means that lender 1 (resp. lender 2) can provide
strictly higher utility than the rival at location 𝑧 =  0 (resp. 𝑧 =  1),
so  each  lender  will  have  a  positive  market  share  in  equilibrium.  If
Condition (B.4) does  not  hold,  one  lender  will  dominate  the  entire
market and drive out the other lender. Throughout the appendix, we
focus on the case with ̃𝑥 ∈ (0, 1).

Proposition 5 is consistent with Proposition 1. At 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥], lender
1’s pricing strategy is maximizing its own profit (i.e., choosing 𝑟∗
1(𝑧) as
high as possible) while ensuring that entrepreneurial utility is no less
than the maximum utility lender 2 can provide. Based on this strategy,
at 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥] the entrepreneurial utility implied by lender 1’s equilibrium
1(𝑧) should exactly match 𝑈 (𝑞2, 𝑐2, 1 − 𝑧, 𝑓2, 𝑟2).
loan rate 𝑟∗
The effects of heterogeneous funding costs. The following proposi-
tion characterizes lenders’ loan rates at different locations.

Let 𝑞𝑖 > 0 for some 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2} and 𝑓1 < 𝑓2. Lender 𝑖’s

Proposition 6.
equilibrium loan rate 𝑟∗

𝑖 (𝑧) is decreasing in its lending distance 𝑠𝑖.
At the indifference location 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, the following relations hold:
1( ̃𝑥) = 𝑟1 < 𝑟2 = 𝑟∗
𝑟∗
< 1−𝑞2(1− ̃𝑥)
𝑐2

1−𝑞1 ̃𝑥
𝑐1

2( ̃𝑥)

.

𝐸[𝐼1( ̃𝑥)] < 𝐸[𝐼2( ̃𝑥)]

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

The first part of the result is consistent with Corollary 1. The second
part of Proposition 6 shows the effects of heterogeneous funding costs.
With heterogeneous funding costs, the two lenders behave differently
at the indifference location 𝑧 = ̃𝑥. At 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, both lenders must offer
their best loan rates to attract the entrepreneur. With 𝑓1 < 𝑓2, lender 1
has a lower best loan rate (i.e., 𝑟1 < 𝑟2; see Lemma 4), so its loan rate
is lower than lender 2’s at the indifference location. Panel 2 of Fig. 5
illustrates the result.

At 𝑧 = ̃𝑥, the entrepreneur is indifferent between the two lenders’
offers. Although a lower marginal funding cost allows lender 1 to offer
a lower loan rate, lender 2 has better monitoring efficiency (i.e., (1 −

18 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

𝑞1 ̃𝑥)∕𝑐1 < (1 − 𝑞2(1 − ̃𝑥))∕𝑐2) and provides a larger expected loan volume
(i.e., 𝐸[𝐼1( ̃𝑥)] < 𝐸[𝐼2( ̃𝑥)]), making the entrepreneur at 𝑧 = ̃𝑥 indifferent
(Panel 2 of Fig. 5).

We  can  view  lender  1  as  a  bank  with  access  to  cheap  funding
(e.g.,  deposits),  while  lender  2  as  a  fintech  with  a  more  expensive
funding  source.  Then, Proposition  6 implies  that,  when  serving  en-
trepreneurs  of  similar  characteristics  (i.e.,  entrepreneurs  around  the
indifference location), fintech lenders will offer higher loan rates and
larger loan volumes than traditional banks.

The  following  corollary  shows  how 𝑓𝑖 affects  lenders’  market

shares.

Corollary 5.
𝑓1 and increasing in 𝑓2.

Lender 1’s market share (measured by ̃𝑥) is decreasing in

Given lender 1’s loan rate 𝑟1(𝑧), a decrease in 𝑓1 will increase lender
1’s skin in the game without reducing the entrepreneur’s skin in the
game (as a result, 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] will increase; see Eq. (B.3)). Hence, every-
thing else being equal, a decrease in 𝑓1 will increase the utility lender
1 provides, improving its competitive advantage. A higher competitive
advantage enables lender 1 to obtain a larger market share, thereby
reducing the rival’s market share.

The following corollary shows how 𝑓𝑖 affects a lender’s pricing and

expected loan volume.

Corollary 6.
expected loan volume 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)] are decreasing in 𝑓1.

Let 𝑧 ∈ [0, ̃𝑥]. Lender 1’s equilibrium loan rate 𝑟∗

1(𝑧) and

As 𝑓1 decreases, lender 1’s competitive advantage becomes higher,
allowing the lender to increase 𝑟∗
1(𝑧) reduces the
entrepreneur’s  skin  in  the  game,  so  lender  1  must  provide  a  higher
expected credit limit (i.e., increase 𝐸[𝐼1(𝑧)]) to match the maximum
utility lender 2 provides.

1(𝑧). An increase in 𝑟∗

The implication of Corollary 6 is that reducing a lender’s funding
costs does not translate into the lender’s lower loan rates; instead, the
lender will fully exploit its market power and extract the entire benefit
of its funding cost advantage.

Finally, we look at the symmetric case with 𝑞𝑖 = 𝑞, 𝑐𝑖 = 𝑐, and 𝑓𝑖 = 𝑓

and study the effect of 𝑓 .

Corollary 7.
equilibrium loan rate 𝑟∗

𝑖 (𝑧) is increasing in 𝑓 .

Let 𝑐1 = 𝑐2 = 𝑐, 𝑞1 = 𝑞2 = 𝑞, and 𝑓1 = 𝑓2 = 𝑓 . Lender 𝑖’s

As both lenders’ marginal funding cost 𝑓 decreases, lender 𝑖 must
decrease its loan rates to protect its market share. The reason is that
a lower 𝑓 allows the rival to offer a lower best loan rate, increasing
its threat to lender 𝑖. As a result, both lenders charge lower loan rates
from their entrepreneurs.

Comparing Corollaries 6 and 7 yields the following implication: If a
policymaker aims to decrease loan rates by reducing lenders’ funding
costs, it should reduce the funding costs for all lenders. Otherwise, some
lenders can enjoy a larger funding cost advantage and charge higher
loan rates.

Appendix C.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103957.

Data availability

Information Technology and Lender Competition (Original data) (Mende-
ley Data)

Boot, A., Hoffmann, P., Laeven, L., Ratnovski, L., 2021. Fintech: what’s old, what’s

Herpfer, C., Mjøs, A., Schmidt, C., 2022. The causal impact of distance on bank lending.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

References

Acharya,  V.,  Almeida,  H.,  Ippolito,  F.,  Perez,  A.,  2014.  Credit  lines  as  monitored
liquidity insurance: Theory and evidence. J. Financ. Econ. 112 (3), 287–319.
Agarwal, S., Alok, S., Ghosh, P., Gupta, S., 2023. Financial Inclusion and Alternate
Credit Scoring: Role of Big Data and Machine Learning in Fintech. Working Paper.
Agarwal, S., Hauswald, R., 2010. Distance and private information in lending. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 23 (7), 2757–2788.

Ahnert,  T.,  Doerr,  S.,  Pierri,  N.,  Timmer,  Y.,  2024.  Does  IT  help?  Information

Technology in Banking and Entrepreneurship. Working Paper.

Almazan, A., 2002. A model of competition in banking: Bank capital vs expertise. J.

Paper.

Contracts. Working Paper.

Financ. Intermed. 11 (1), 87–121.

Babina, T., Bahaj, S.A., Buchak, G., De Marco, F., Foulis, A.K., Gornall, W., Mazzola, F.,
Yu, T., 2024. Customer Data Access and Fintech Entry: Early Evidence from Open
Banking. Working Paper.

Berg, T., Burg, V., Gombović, A., Puri, M., 2020. On the rise of fintechs: Credit scoring

using digital footprints. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (7), 2845–2897.

Berg,  T.,  Fuster,  A.,  Puri,  M.,  2022.  Fintech  lending.  Annu.  Rev.  Finan.  Econ.  14,

187–207.

Berg, T., Reisinger, M., Streitz, D., 2021. Spillover effects in empirical corporate finance.

J. Financ. Econ. 142 (3), 1109–1127.

Björkegren, D., Grissen, D., 2020. Behavior revealed in mobile phone usage predicts

credit repayment. World Bank Econ. Rev. 34 (3), 618–634.

Blickle, K., Parlatore, C., Saunders, A., 2023. Specialization in Banking. Working Paper,

967.

new? J. Financ. Stab. 53, 100836.

Banks. Working Paper.

FRB of New York Staff Report 923.

Bouvard, M., Casamatta, C., Xiong, R., 2022. Lending and Monitoring: Big Tech vs

Branzoli, N., Fringuellotti, F., 2022. The Effect of Bank Monitoring on Loan Repayment.

Branzoli, N., Rainone, E., Supino, I., 2024. The role of banks’ technology adoption in

credit markets during the pandemic. J. Financ. Stab. 101230.

Brevoort, K.P., Wolken, J.D., 2009. Does distance matter in banking? In: The Changing

Geography of Banking and Finance. Springer, pp. 27–56.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Butler, A.W., Cornaggia, J., Gurun, U.G., 2017. Do local capital market conditions affect

consumers’ borrowing decisions? Manage. Sci. 63 (12), 4175–4187.

Carletti, E., Claessens, S., Fatas, A., Vives, X., 2020. The Bank Business Model in the
Post-Covid-19 World. The Future of Banking, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Chen, S., D’Silva, D., Packer, F., Tiwari, S., et al., 2022. Virtual Banking and Beyond.

BIS Papers, Bank for International Settlements.

Chodorow-Reich, G., Falato, A., 2022. The loan covenant channel: How bank health

transmits to the real economy. J. Finance 77 (1), 85–128.

Cordella, T., Yeyati, E.L., 2002. Financial opening, deposit insurance, and risk in a

model of banking competition. Eur. Econ. Rev. 46 (3), 471–485.

Dadoukis, A., Fiaschetti, M., Fusi, G., 2021. IT adoption and bank performance during

the Covid-19 pandemic. Econom. Lett. 204, 109904.

Dai,  L.,  Han,  J.,  Shi,  J.,  Zhang,  B.,  2023.  Digital  Footprints  as  Collateral  for  Debt

D’Andrea, A., Pelosi, M., Sette, E., 2021. Broadband and Bank Intermediation. Working

Collection. Working Paper.

Paper.

Dasgupta, P., Maskin, E., 1986. The existence of equilibrium in discontinuous economic

games, I: Theory. Rev. Econ. Stud. 53 (1), 1–26.

Degryse,  H.,  Ongena,  S.,  2005.  Distance,  lending  relationships,  and  competition.  J.

Di Patti, E.B., Dell’Ariccia, G., 2004. Bank competition and firm creation. J. Money

Diamond, D.W., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Rev. Econ.

Finance 60 (1), 231–266.

Credit Bank. 225–251.

Stud. 51 (3), 393–414.

Dorfleitner,  G.,  Priberny,  C.,  Schuster,  S.,  Stoiber,  J.,  Weber,  M.,  de  Castro,  I.,
Kammler,  J.,  2016.  Description-text  related  soft  information  in  peer-to-peer
lending–evidence  from  two  leading  European  platforms.  J.  Bank.  Financ.  64,
169–187.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2021. Banking on deposits: Maturity transformation

without interest rate risk. J. Finance 76 (3), 1091–1143.

Dugast,  J.,  Foucault,  T.,  2018.  Data  abundance  and  asset  price  informativeness.  J.

Duquerroy, A., Mazet-Sonilhac, C., Mésonnier, J.-S., Paravisini, D., et al., 2022. Bank

Rev. 122–137.

Financ. Econ. 130 (2), 367–391.

Local Specialization. Working Paper.

Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Huang, Y., Shin, H.S., Zbinden, P., 2019. BigTech and the

changing structure of financial intermediation. Econ. Policy.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103957 

FSB,  2019.  FinTech  and  Market  Structure  in  Financial  Services:  Market  Develop-
ments and Potential Financial Stability Implications. Financial Innovation Network,
Financial Stability Board, Basel, Switzerland.

Fuster,  A.,  Plosser,  M.,  Schnabl,  P.,  Vickery,  J.,  2019.  The  role  of  technology  in

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1854–1899.

Gao,  Q.,  Lin,  M.,  Sias,  R.,  2023.  Words  matter:  The  role  of  readability,  tone,  and
deception cues in online credit markets. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 58 (1), 1–28.
Ghosh, P., Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2022. FinTech Lending and Cashless Payments. Working

Giometti,  M.,  Pietrosanti,  S.,  2023.  Bank  Specialization  and  the  Design  of  Loan

Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2022. The rise of finance companies and fintech lenders in

small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4859–4901.

Gustafson, M.T., Ivanov, I.T., Meisenzahl, R.R., 2021. Bank monitoring: Evidence from

syndicated loans. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (2), 452–477.

Hauswald,  R.,  Marquez,  R.,  2003.  Information  technology  and  financial  services

competition. Rev. Financ. Stud. 16 (3), 921–948.

Hauswald, R., Marquez, R., 2006. Competition and strategic information acquisition in

credit markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 19 (3), 967–1000.

He, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2023. Open banking: Credit market competition when

borrowers own the data. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 449–474.

He, Z., Jiang, S., Xu, D., Yin, X., 2022. Investing in Lending Technology: IT Spending

in Banking. Working Paper, 2021–116, University of Chicago.

Heitz,  A.R.,  Martin,  C.,  Ufier,  A.,  2023.  Bank  Monitoring  with  On-Site  Inspections.

Working Paper.

Manage. Sci. 69 (2), 723–740.

8 (1), 1–41.

Hertzberg, A., Liberman, A., Paravisini, D., 2018. Screening on loan terms: evidence
from maturity choice in consumer credit. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (9), 3532–3567.
Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real

sector. Q. J. Econ. 112 (3), 663–691.

Hotelling, H., 1929. Stability in competition. Econ. J. 39 (153), 41–57.
Huang, Y., Zhang, L., Li, Z., Qiu, H., Sun, T., Wang, X., 2020. Fintech Credit Risk

Assessment for SMEs: Evidence from China. Working Paper.

Iyer, R., Khwaja, A.I., Luttmer, E.F., Shue, K., 2016. Screening peers softly: Inferring

the quality of small borrowers. Manage. Sci. 62 (6), 1554–1577.

Jiang,  E.X.,  Yu,  G.Y.,  Zhang,  J.,  2023.  Bank  Competition  Amid  Digital  Disruption:

Implications for Financial Inclusion. Working Paper.

Kawai, K., Onishi, K., Uetake, K., 2022. Signaling in online credit markets. J. Polit.

Econ. 130 (6), 1585–1629.

Li, J., Pegoraro, S., 2023. Borrowing from a Bigtech Platform. Working Paper.
Liberti, J.M., Petersen, M.A., 2019. Information: Hard and soft. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud.

Lin, M., Prabhala, N.R., Viswanathan, S., 2013. Judging borrowers by the company
they keep: Friendship networks and information asymmetry in online peer-to-peer
lending. Manage. Sci. 59 (1), 17–35.

Liu, L., Lu, G., Xiong, W., 2024. The Big Tech Lending Model. Working Paper.
Martinez-Miera, D., Repullo, R., 2019. Monetary policy, macroprudential policy, and

financial stability. Annu. Rev. Econ. 11, 809–832.

Matutes,  C.,  Vives,  X.,  1996.  Competition  for  deposits,  fragility,  and  insurance.  J.

Financ. Intermed. 5 (2), 184–216.

Mester,  L.J.,  Nakamura,  L.I.,  Renault,  M.,  2007.  Transactions  accounts  and  loan

monitoring. Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (3), 529–556.

Minnis,  M.,  Sutherland,  A.,  2017.  Financial  statements  as  monitoring  mechanisms:

Evidence from small commercial loans. J. Account. Res. 55 (1), 197–233.

Netzer, O., Lemaire, A., Herzenstein, M., 2019. When words sweat: Identifying signals
for loan default in the text of loan applications. J. Mar. Res. 56 (6), 960–980.

Ouyang, S., 2023. Cashless Payment and Financial Inclusion. Working Paper.
Paravisini,  D.,  Rappoport,  V.,  Schnabl,  P.,  2023.  Specialization  in  bank  lending:

Evidence from exporting firms. J. Finance 78 (4), 2049–2085.

Petersen,  M.A.,  Rajan,  R.G.,  2002.  Does  distance  still  matter?  The  information

revolution in small business lending. J. Finance 57 (6), 2533–2570.

Philippon, T., 2016. The Fintech Opportunity. Working Paper, No. 22476, National

Bureau of Economic Research.

Reny,  P.J.,  1999.  On  the  existence  of  pure  and  mixed  strategy  Nash  equilibria  in

discontinuous games. Econometrica 67 (5), 1029–1056.

Sufi, A., 2009. Bank lines of credit in corporate finance: An empirical analysis. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 22 (3), 1057–1088.

Thisse, J.-F., Vives, X., 1988. On the strategic choice of spatial price policy. Am. Econ.

Villas-Boas,  J.M.,  Schmidt-Mohr,  U.,  1999.  Oligopoly  with  asymmetric  information:

Differentiation in credit markets. Rand J. Econ. 375–396.

Vives,  X.,  2010.  Information  and  Learning  in  Markets:  The  Impact  of  Market

Microstructure. Princeton University Press.

Vives, X., 2019. Digital disruption in banking. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ. 11, 243–272.

19 

