Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Information sharing in financial markets✩
Itay Goldstein a, Yan Xiong b, Liyan Yang c,∗
a Department of Finance, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
b Faculty of Business and Economics, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
c Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, 105 St. George Street, Toronto, ON M5S3E6, Canada

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We study information sharing between strategic investors who are informed about asset fundamentals. We
demonstrate that a coarsely informed investor optimally chooses to share information if his counterparty
investor is well informed. By doing so, the coarsely informed investor invites the other investor to trade
against his information, thereby reducing his price impact. Paradoxically, the well informed investor loses from
receiving information because of the resulting worsened market liquidity and the more aggressive trading by
the coarsely informed investor. Our analysis sheds light on phenomena such as private communications among
investors and public information sharing on social media.

Dataset link: Replication package for numerical
examples (Original data)

JEL classification:
D82
G14
G18

Keywords:
Information sharing
Trading against error
Trading profits
Asset markets

1.  Introduction

Information sharing is ubiquitous to financial markets. In an early
survey  by Shiller  and  Pound (1989),  a  majority  of  institutional  in-
vestors  attribute  their  recent  trades  to  discussions  with  peers.  More
recently, Hong et al. (2005) and Pool et al. (2015) provide evidence
suggesting that mutual fund managers trade based on local word-of-
mouth communication in the asset-management community. In today’s
environment, communication continues in different forms on the Inter-
net, in social media outlets such as Twitter, Seeking Alpha, StockTwits,
and Reddit, or in private Internet communities such as SumZero and
Value Investors Club.1 It is thus not surprising that communications

among  investors  are  thought  to  have  a  profound  influence  on  trad-
ing strategies and financial market outcomes, as summarized by this
quote from Shiller (2015, p.180): ‘‘Word-of-mouth transmission of ideas
appears to be an important contributor to day-to-day or hour-to-hour
stock market fluctuations.’’

Despite  large  empirical  and  anecdotal  evidence,  the  theoretical
basis for understanding information sharing in financial markets needs
further development. Sharing information is costly to investors, as it
might reduce their informational advantage. Hence, it is important to
understand what benefit investors get from sharing information and
under what circumstances they will choose to share information. Of

✩
Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, an anonymous referee, Swaminathan Balasubramaniam, Snehal Banerjee, Ing-Haw
Cheng, Jean Edouard Colliard, Jason Donaldson, Phil Dybvig, Hanming Fang, Thierry Foucault, Chong Huang, Naveen Khanna, Richard E. Kihlstrom, Pete
Kyle, Mina Lee, Jiasun Li, Dan Luo, Dmitry Orlov, Michael Sockin, Günter Strobl, Laura Veldkamp, Xavier Vives, Vladimir Vladimirov, Chaojun Wang, Bart
Zhou Yueshen, Yao Zeng, and the participants at the 2020 Greater China Area Finance Conference, the 2021 Future of Financial Information Conference, the
2021 Northern Finance Association Annual Meeting, the 2022 American Finance Association Annual Meeting, the 2022 Econometric Society Conference, the
2022 European Finance Association Meeting, Accounting and Economics Society Webinars, Mid-Atlantic Research Conference in Finance, Virtual Finance Theory
Seminar, HKUST, Renmin University of China, ShanghaiTech University, Tsinghua University, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of Hong
Kong, University of Nevada, University of Technology Sydney, University of Utah, University of Warwick, and Zhejiang University. An earlier version of this paper
was circulated under the title ‘‘Whoever has will be given more: Information sharing in financial markets.’’ Yan Xiong thanks the support by National Natural
Science Foundation of China [NSFC 72422007] and the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China [project no. 16501523].
Liyan Yang thanks the support by Bank of Canada Fellowship and Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) for the research described in this
article.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:

liyan.yang@rotman.utoronto.ca (L. Yang).

networking websites.

1 See https://sumzero.com/ and https://valueinvestorsclub.com/ for details. Crawford et al. (2017, 2018) contain a detailed introduction to the two social

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103967
Received 21 June 2024; Received in revised form 22 October 2024; Accepted 23 October 2024
Available online 6 November 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

particular  interest  is  whether  those  who  share  information  are  the
most informed. From the point of view of informational efficiency, one
would  hope  that  this  is  the  case,  but  these  traders  might  not  have
the  incentive  to  do  so.  Anecdotally,  it  also  seems  that  much  of  the
information shared in financial markets comes from traders who are
not particularly sophisticated. In this paper, we develop a model that
sheds new light on these issues. We show how information sharing can
be beneficial for some traders because of how it affects the behavior
of other traders, and, most importantly, that the traders who choose to
share information are the less informed. We explore the implications
that this endogenous information sharing has for investor profits and
market quality.

Our  model  is  based  on  the Kyle (1985)  framework,  extended  to
allow investors to choose whether to share their private information
before  trading.  The  market  has  one  risky  asset,  traded  by  informed
investors, noise traders, and a competitive market maker. Our basic
model considers the parsimonious case of two investors, denoted by H
and L, where H has perfect information about the fundamentals of the
asset while L receives noisy information. In extensions, we consider a
less-than-perfectly informed H trader and also multiple traders. Before
trading, H and L simultaneously decide whether to share their private
information with each other. Then, they trade on the endowed infor-
mation and the shared information, if any, and the price is set by a
market maker at the conditional expected value of the asset given the
total order flow.

Our  key  result  is  that  in  equilibrium,  the  L  investor  chooses  to
share his information with the H investor, while the H investor does
not.  Hence,  information  flows  against  the  direction  of  information
efficiency. This result is in stark contrast to what is typically assumed
in  the  information-sharing  literature.  In  the  existing  theories,  when
information is transmitted, it is assumed to be either from informed
to uninformed investors (e.g., Indjejikian et al., 2014; Kovbasyuk and
Pagano, 2015; Ljungqvist and Qian, 2016; Liu, 2017) or to be mutually
exchanged among investors (e.g., Colla and Mele, 2010; Ozsoylev and
Walden, 2011; Han and Yang, 2013; Manela, 2014; Chen et al., 2015).
Our model demonstrates the importance of asking who has a greater
incentive to share information and endogenizing the direction of in-
formation flow. The key mechanism behind the result is that the less
informed investor benefits from sharing the information and having the
more informed investor trade against him, offsetting his price impact.
To understand this result, it is useful to break down how the receiver
of information uses it in the market, and how this, in turn, affects the
sender of information. There are two effects. First, the ‘‘forecasting-
fundamental effect’’ makes the receiver more informed about the asset
fundamental  and  pushes  him  to  trade  on  the  shared  information  in
the  same  direction  as  the  sender.  Second,  the  ‘‘trading-against-error
effect’’ helps the receiver forecast the component in the sender’s order
flow  that  is  based  on  noise  and  pushes  him  to  trade  on  the  shared
information  in  the  opposite  direction  of  the  sender.  The  first  effect
makes sharing information undesirable since it reduces the informa-
tional advantage that the sender has. The second effect makes sharing
information desirable since it reduces the price impact that the sender
will have when trading on his signal. Since H is more informed than L,
the first effect dominates for H, and the second effect dominates for L,
generating the result that in equilibrium, L will share information and
H will not. This result is shown most clearly in our baseline model,
in which H is perfectly informed, but as mentioned above, we show it
is robust in a setting where H also has noisy information but is more
informed than L.

Ex post, when L shares information with H, both of them benefit
from the way that H is using this information, i.e., from the trading
against error. For H, trading against error is an opportunity to benefit
more  from  the  expected  difference  between  fundamental  value  and
price. For L, trading against error by H reduces L’s own price impact,
given  that  H  trades  against  L’s  information.  This  is  why  L  chooses
to share the information and H chooses to trade against it. However,

considering the overall ex ante effect, we show that H is actually made
worse off by the fact that L shares information with him. This is due
to the indirect effect that L’s information sharing has on L’s trading
strategy and on the market maker’s pricing rule.

Specifically, in response to information sharing, L trades more ag-
gressively since the price is less sensitive to his information, and the
market maker sets prices to be more sensitive to overall order flow
because of an increase in informed trades (even though informed trade
is partially offset by less aggressive trading by H). These changes harm
H,  making  him  overall  worse  off  despite  the  positive  ex  post  direct
effect. By contrast, the indirect effect just strengthens the overall benefit
to L. The problem for H is that he lacks the commitment ability to
ignore the information once it is shared, as it is optimal for him to use
it ex post. This, in turn, makes him worse off ex ante. We go deeper
into the issue of lack of commitment in an extension that introduces
multiple H investors.

Thinking beyond the direction of information sharing and the impli-
cations for individual investors, it is important to explore the implica-
tions for key market variables. We do so by comparing an economy
with  no  information  sharing  to  one  where  information  is  shared  as
in the equilibrium described above. We show that, even though the
information is shared by less informed investors, information sharing
still  leads  to  an  overall  increase  in  the  informativeness  of  the  price
(i.e.,  market  efficiency).  This  is  a  combination  of  the  fact  that  L  is
trading more aggressively on his signal and H is trading against the
noise, implying that overall more fundamental information is injected
into the price. A direct implication of this effect is that information
sharing leads to lower market liquidity, as the market maker’s adverse-
selection concern is strengthened. Considering the effect on volume, we
find that it can go both ways. When he shares information, L’s trading
volume increases, whereas both H and the market maker reduce their
trading volume. Overall, we find that the first effect dominates when
L’s information is highly imprecise, as then sharing information leads
him to trade a lot more aggressively.

Our baseline model derives the above results in a simple framework.
We contribute to the literature by showing that information sharing –
from less informed to more informed – can be an equilibrium outcome
in a canonical setting. Although these results may not universally apply,
we establish their validity across a range of extensions and variations
of  the  baseline  model.  First,  while  our  baseline  model  considers  a
perfectly informed H investor, this is clearly a significant simplification.
Hence, we extend the model to include two differentially imperfectly
informed investors. We show that the more informed investor never
shares  information,  and  the  less  informed  shares  as  long  as  his  in-
formation is sufficiently less precise. Second, in the main model we
consider a decision on information sharing that is made before investors
observe their signals. We consider an extension with an information-
sharing  decision  made  after  the  realization  of  the  signal.  This  is  a
more complicated setting because of signaling issues, but we generally
confirm that the main intuition of our model still holds.

Third, as mentioned above, our model shows that the H investor
is overall worse off in the information-sharing economy. An important
question then is why he cannot commit not to listen to the information.
In a more realistic model with multiple H investors, we show that even
if they had the ability to commit they would individually choose not
to  do  so.  There  is  essentially  a  coordination  problem  among  the  H
investors that prevents choosing commitment. Fourth, in reality, there
are typically fewer highly informed investors than imprecisely informed
investors in financial markets. We therefore consider an extension with
multiple investors, particularly where there are more L investors than H
investors. We show that, despite the potential for information leakage
to  peer  investors,  L  investors  may  still  share  their  information,  and
the incentive to share is strengthened when the common noise in their
information is significant.

Fifth, our main model assumes that information is only shared with
investors,  but  an  important  question  for  some  applications  is  what

2 

I. Goldstein et al.

happens if it was shared publicly and the market maker observed it
as well. We provide an extension where this is the form of information
sharing. We show that when the market maker can perfectly observe
the information, L does not share his information. Conversely, when
the market maker cannot process the shared information effectively,
L’s willingness to share depends on both his information precision and
the  signal-interpretation  abilities  of  the  H  investor  and  the  market
maker.  If  L  possesses  sufficiently  precise  information,  he  is  unlikely
to share it, as he gains little from the trading-against-error effect and
risks revealing valuable information to the market maker. L is more
inclined to share information when his own information is less precise,
the market maker’s signal interpretation is weak, and the H investor is
capable of effectively processing the information provided.

Finally, we provide two additional extensions in the online appendix
and briefly describe them in the main text: endogenous information
acquisition and three types of differentially informed investors. In both
alternative settings, we find that our key result – that less informed
investors choose to share information with more informed investors –
continues to hold for a robust set of parameter values and that the result
is driven by H trading against the information shared by L.

After  analyzing  the  model  and  its  implications,  we  discuss  the
connection of the model to empirical evidence and popular commen-
tary on financial markets. We argue that our model can apply to the
well-documented market chatter in financial markets, where investors
privately  communicate  with  each  other.  We  also  discuss  how  our
model, and in particular one of the extensions described above, applies
to the recently growing public information sharing on social media. In
both cases, our theory speaks to the question of who shares information
with whom and makes the unique prediction, which is consistent with
descriptions of the financial market, that information tends to flow from
the less informed investors.

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section 2
presents  the  baseline  model.  In  Section 3,  we  solve  the  model  and
describe the main implications of information sharing in equilibrium.
Section 4 presents  several  extensions  and  variations  of  the  baseline
model and briefly describes several others that are contained in the
online appendix. In Section 5, we discuss the link of the model to real-
world  financial  markets  and  empirical  evidence  on  them.  Section 6
concludes. Proofs are relegated to the appendix. We now discuss the
relation of our paper to the literature.

Related  literature. Our  paper  contributes  to  the  literature  on  infor-
mation  sharing  in  financial  markets.  Many  studies  take  information
sharing as given and examine its implications (e.g., Duffie and Manso,
2007; Duffie et al., 2009, 2010; Colla and Mele, 2010; Ozsoylev and
Walden, 2011; Han and Yang, 2013; Manela, 2014; Boyarchenko et al.,
2021). Those studies do not answer the question of why investors share
information in the first place.

The existing literature has also offered various possible reasons for
information sharing. Benabou and Laroque (1992) argue that insiders
can  use  privileged  information  to  manipulate  markets. Stein (2008)
posits that an agent shares ideas in the hope that his counterpart will
be able to take it one step further, and will then bounce the more fully
developed idea right back to him. Ljungqvist and Qian (2016) suggest
that  arbitrageurs  with  short  positions  may  reveal  their  information
to  accelerate  price  correction,  thereby  circumventing  limits  to  arbi-
trage. The idea that information revelation can be used to accelerate
price correction is particularly relevant for investors with short-term
incentives  (e.g., Kovbasyuk  and  Pagano, 2015; Liu, 2017; Schmidt,
2019). In addition, by injecting noise into the information, an investor
gains an advantage over uninformed followers (Van Bommel, 2003)
or other informed competitors (Indjejikian et al., 2014); by disclosing
a  mixture  of  fundamental  information  and  his  position,  an  investor
induces  market  makers  to  move  the  asset  price  in  a  manner  favor-
able to him (Pasquariello and Wang, 2023). Foucault and Lescourret
(2003) show that information sharing is possible between traders with

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

different  types  of  information  (fundamental  versus  non-fundamental
information).

In  a  contemporaneous  paper, Balasubramaniam (2024)  demon-
strates  that  competing  traders  tend  to  share  information  when  they
have significant disagreements. While both studies indicate that some
form  of  asymmetry  –  whether  in  investors’  beliefs  or  the  precision
of their information – is important for information sharing to occur,
there are key differences. First, the results vary. In Balasubramaniam
(2024), if information sharing occurs in equilibrium, it must be that
both  investors  share  information  with  one  another.  In  contrast,  our
study shows that information flows solely from L to H. Second, while
it might be expected that investors with disagreement would seek to
exchange information, it is less so if they share the same prior and aim
to use the shared information to update their beliefs.

None of the existing papers on information sharing asks the question
of who shares information with whom. Our study fills this void and
predicts that information is transmitted from the less informed investor
to the more informed investor. We think this is a fundamental point,
especially given observations that information shared in financial mar-
kets may not be of high quality. In addition, another new implication
of our model is that the information sender is better off, whereas the
receiver becomes worse off after information sharing. In contrast, in
the existing explanations, both should be better off from information
sharing at the expense of third parties (e.g., Indjejikian et al., 2014;
Foucault and Lescourret, 2003). Finally, our theory does not require
that  the  information  sender  owns  initial  positions  or  has  short-term
incentives. Unlike other explanations in which the investor ‘‘talks for
her book’’ (e.g., Schmidt, 2019; Pasquariello and Wang, 2023), in our
model  the  investor  does  not  have  any  book  yet  and  instead  reveals
information to help build it.

The  trading-against-error  effect  also  connects  our  theory  to  the
literature on private information about noise trading (e.g., Ganguli and
Yang, 2009; Marmora and Rytchkov, 2018; Farboodi and Veldkamp,
2020). Both L’s trades and noise trading look like ‘‘dumb money’’ to
H, but the dumb money in our setting is driven by the error term in
the less informed investor’s signal, as opposed to pure noise trading.
The literature on noise-trading information does not address the key
question  we  ask  (who  shares  information  with  whom)  and  so  does
not offer our novel results that the less informed share with the more
informed and that the information receiver (sender) becomes worse off
(better off).

2.  Model

We consider a Kyle model (Kyle, 1985) and extend its analysis to
allow  for  information  sharing  between  investors.  The  economy  has
three dates: 𝑡 =  0, 1, 2. Fig. 1 describes the timeline of the economy.
There is a single risky asset with a date-2 liquidation value ̃𝑣, where ̃𝑣 ∼
𝑁(0, 1).2 The financial market operates on date 1, and it is populated
by three groups of agents: one market maker, noise traders, and two
risk-neutral rational investors. As standard in the literature, the market
maker sets the price based on the weak market-efficiency rule and noise
traders  submit  exogenous  random  market  orders.  The  two  rational
investors are endowed with private information about the fundamental
̃𝑣 of the risky asset, and their information is of different precision levels.
On 𝑡 = 0, information can be shared between the two rational investors.
The  two  rational  investors,  denoted  by  H  and  L,  differ  in  their
information quality: H owns more precise information about the fun-
damental than L. To illustrate the mechanism transparently, we now
assume that H perfectly observes ̃𝑣. In one extended setting analyzed

2 The normalization that ̃𝑣 has a zero mean and a unit standard deviation
is without loss of generality. If we instead assume ̃𝑣 ∼ 𝑁( ̄𝑣, 𝜎2
𝑣 ) (with ̄𝑣 ∈ R
and 𝜎𝑣 > 0), then all our results would hold as long as we reinterpret the
information precision levels as signal-to-noise ratios.

3 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Fig. 1. Timeline.

in Section 4.1, we will assume that H has imperfect information about ̃𝑣
and show that the result continues to hold as long as L’s information is
sufficiently imprecise. L is coarsely informed about ̃𝑣, and he can only
observe a noisy private signal as follows:
̃𝑦 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝑒, where ̃𝑒 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜌−1).

(1)

The parameter 𝜌 ∈ (0, ∞) governs the quality of L’s private information.
On 𝑡 = 0, H and L simultaneously decide whether to share their pri-
vate information to maximize their respective expected trading profits.
For investor 𝑖 ∈  {𝐻 , 𝐿}, we use 𝐴𝑖 ∈  {𝑆 , ∅} to denote information-
sharing decisions, where 𝐴𝑖 = 𝑆 means that the investor fully shares
information with the other investor, whereas 𝐴𝑖 = ∅ means that the
investor keeps it secret. For instance, if on date 0, L decides to share
information with H (i.e., 𝐴𝐿 = 𝑆), then H perfectly observes ̃𝑦 on date
1.3 We assume that the date-0 information-sharing decisions become
common knowledge at the beginning of date 1, so that we can apply
backward induction in Section 3.1 to compute the equilibrium of our
economy.

In the main model, for tractability reasons, we have assumed that in-
vestors can commit themselves to an information-sharing policy before
receiving  private  information.  The  otherwise  ex  post  setup  (i.e.,  in-
vestors make information-sharing decisions after receiving private in-
formation) is less tractable because of signaling issues. In Section 4.2,
we  have  analyzed  a  setting  with  ex  post  information  sharing  and
generally confirm that the key insights of our main model continue to
hold.

Trading occurs on 𝑡 = 1, and we use ̃𝑝 to denote the equilibrium
asset price. Conditional on the endowed private information, as well
as the shared information (if any), investor 𝑖 ∈ {𝐻 , 𝐿} places market
order ̃𝑥𝑖 to maximize the expected trading profit as follows:

𝑖],


𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑖( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)|
where 
𝑖 indicates investor 𝑖’s information set. For instance, if L shares
information with H but H does not share information with L (i.e., 𝐴𝐿 =
𝑆 and 𝐴𝐻 = ∅), then the two investors’ information sets are respec-
tively 

𝐿 = { ̃𝑦} and 

𝐻 = { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦}.

(2)

We assume that investors do not observe the price when they trade
and hence, they submit market orders, as in Kyle (1985). This setup
of the financial market is a simple way to capture the important idea
that investors, when they trade, face uncertainty about the price which

3 We  have  also  considered  an  alternative  setup  that  allows  for  partial
information  sharing  between  investors  and  found  that  our  results  remain
unchanged.  In  this  alternative  setup,  we  follow  the  industrial-organization
literature on information sharing among firms (e.g., Vives, 1984; Gal-Or, 1985;
Darrough, 1993; Xiong and Yang, 2021) and the literature on disclosure by
firms or regulators (e.g., Diamond, 1985; Morris and Shin, 2002; James and
Lawler, 2011; Goldstein and Yang, 2017), and specify information sharing as
follows: Suppose that H shares with L a garbled signal ̃𝑠𝐻 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝜀𝐻 , where
)
̃𝜀𝐻 ∼ 𝑁 (
0, 𝜏−1
and that L shares with H a garbled signal ̃𝑠𝐿 = ̃𝑦 + ̃𝜀𝐿, where
𝐻
̃𝜀𝐿 ∼ 𝑁 (
)
. The precision levels 𝜏𝐻 and 𝜏𝐿 of the shared information are
0, 𝜏 −1
𝐿
controlled by H and L, respectively, and can range between 0 and ∞; that
is, 𝜏𝑖 ∈ [0, ∞], for 𝑖 ∈ {𝐻 , 𝐿}. If 𝜏𝑖 = 0, investor 𝑖’s shared information is not
informative at all, or equivalently investor 𝑖 does not share any information. If
𝜏𝑖 = ∞, investor 𝑖 fully shares information. Thus, our baseline model essentially
assumes that 𝜏𝑖 takes only two values, 0 and ∞.

is still being formed. In this way, investors will attempt to learn about
the actions of other investors, as this can have significant implications
for the trading environment. If we consider an alternative setting in
which investors can base their trade on equilibrium prices (e.g., Kyle,
1989), then our information sharing mechanism will not be applicable,
because  in  such  a  setting,  investors  effectively  know  the  execution
prices and so do not need to learn about other investors’ actions, which
shuts down our mechanism.

Finally, noise traders place market order ̃𝑢, where ̃𝑢 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2

𝑢 ) (with
𝜎𝑢 > 0) and ̃𝑢 is independent of all other random shocks. The total order
flow faced by the market maker is ̃𝜔 = ̃𝑥𝐻 + ̃𝑥𝐿 + ̃𝑢. The market maker
sets price ̃𝑝 according to the weak-efficiency rule,

̃𝑝 = 𝐸( ̃𝑣| ̃𝜔).

(3)

3.  Equilibrium and implications

In this section, we first characterize the equilibrium in Section 3.1.
Since we assume that the date-0 information-sharing decisions become
observable at the beginning of date 1, we will apply backward induc-
tion to compute the equilibrium. Section 3.2 examines the implications
of information sharing for investor profits and market quality.

3.1.  Equilibrium characterization

3.1.1.  Equilibrium at the trading stage

Given investors’ information-sharing decisions 𝐴𝐿 and 𝐴𝐻 on date
0, different trading subgames follow on date 1, depending on whether
the investors share their respective private information. The investors’
expected  profits  evaluated  on  the  date-1  subgame  equilibrium  will
serve as their payoffs of the date-0 information-sharing game. As stan-
dard in the literature, in each subgame, we consider linear equilibrium
in which investors’ optimal trading strategies and the market maker’s
equilibrium  pricing  rule  are  linear  functions.  We  next  discuss  each
subgame separately.

𝐿 = { ̃𝑦} and 

Subgame 1: Neither investor shares information (𝐴𝐿 = 𝐴𝐻 = ∅). When
neither  investor  shares  information,  each  investor  only  observes  the
endowed information. Hence, 
𝐻 = { ̃𝑣}. This setting is
the classical Kyle (1985) trading game with two deferentially informed
investors  and  the  equilibrium  derivation  is  standard.  We  conjecture
the following trading strategies of investors and the pricing rule of the
market maker: ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦, ̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣, and ̃𝑝 = 𝜆 ̃𝜔, where 𝛽𝑦, 𝛼𝑣, and 𝜆 are
endogenous constants. We compute those constants by examining the
agents’ maximization problems.

Using the conjectured H’s trading strategy and the market maker’s
pricing rule, we can compute L’s conditional expected profit in Eq. (2)
as follows:

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦] = ̃𝑥𝐿

[ 𝜌
1 + 𝜌

(

̃𝑦 − 𝜆

̃𝑥𝐿 + 𝛼𝑣

)]
̃𝑦

.

𝜌
1 + 𝜌

Maximizing the expected profit yields L’s implied trading rule, ̃𝑥𝐿 =
(1−𝜆𝛼𝑣)𝜌
̃𝑦. Comparing this implied trading rule with the conjectured L’s
2𝜆(1+𝜌)
trading strategy, we have 𝛽𝑦 = (1−𝜆𝛼𝑣)𝜌
. Similarly, using the conjec-
2𝜆(1+𝜌)
tured L’s trading strategy and the market maker’s pricing rule, we can
compute H’s conditional expected trading profits as follows:
] .
[ ̃𝑣 − 𝜆( ̃𝑥𝐻 + 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑣)
𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝) | ̃𝑣] = ̃𝑥𝐻

4 

I. Goldstein et al.

We then compute H’s optimal trading rule and compare it with the
.  Finally,  using  the
conjectured  strategy  for  H,  yielding 𝛼𝑣 =
conjectured  trading  strategies,  the  market  maker  sets  the  price  ac-
̃𝜔. This implies that
cording to Eq. (3) as follows: ̃𝑝 =

1−𝜆𝛽𝑦
2𝜆

𝛼𝑣+𝛽𝑦
(𝛼𝑣+𝛽𝑦)2+𝛽2
𝑦

1
𝜌 +𝜎2
𝑢

𝜆 =

𝛼𝑣+𝛽𝑦
(𝛼𝑣+𝛽𝑦)2+𝛽2
𝑦
1−𝜆𝛽𝑦
2𝜆

. We can combine this equation with 𝛽𝑦 = (1−𝜆𝛼𝑣)𝜌
2𝜆(1+𝜌)

1
𝜌 +𝜎2
𝑢
to characterize the equilibrium trading and pricing rules
and 𝛼𝑣 =
and the two investors’ resulting expected profits, which are summarized
in the following lemma, where the superscript ‘‘N’’ denotes the fact that
neither L nor H shares information.

Suppose  that  neither
Lemma  1 (Neither  investor  shares  information).
investor shares information on date 0 (i.e., 𝐴𝐿 = 𝐴𝐻 = ∅). In the date-1
trading equilibrium, the two investors’ trading strategies are ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑁
𝑦 ̃𝑦 and
̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝑁
𝛽𝑁
𝑦 =

𝑣 ̃𝑣, respectively, where
and 𝛼𝑁

𝑣 =

(4)

,

(2 + 𝜌)𝜎𝑢
4 + 𝜌(5 + 2𝜌)

√

𝜌𝜎𝑢
4 + 𝜌(5 + 2𝜌)

√

and the market maker’s pricing rule is ̃𝑝 = 𝜆𝑁 ̃𝜔, where

.

(5)

𝜆𝑁 =

√

4 + 𝜌(5 + 2𝜌)
(4 + 3𝜌)𝜎𝑢

The two investors’ date-0 unconditional expected profits evaluated at the
date-1 trading equilibrium are, respectively:

𝜋𝑁
𝐿 =

𝜌(1 + 𝜌)𝜎𝑢

√

(4 + 3𝜌)

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

and 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 =

(2 + 𝜌)2𝜎𝑢

√

(4 + 3𝜌)

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

.

(6)

𝐿 = { ̃𝑦} and 

Subgame 2: L shares information and H does not (𝐴𝐿 = 𝑆 and 𝐴𝐻 = ∅).
If
L shares information whereas H does not, the two investors’ information
sets become 
𝐻 = { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦}. In Section 3.1.2, we will show
that  these  sharing  decisions  will  form  the  equilibrium  at  the  date-0
information-sharing stage. We follow similar steps as in Subgame 1 and
derive the date-1 trading equilibrium in Subgame 2. The results are
summarized in the following lemma, where the superscript ‘‘L’’ denotes
the fact that L shares but H does not share information.

Lemma 2 (L shares information but H does not). Suppose that only L
shares information on date 0 (i.e., 𝐴𝐿 = 𝑆 and 𝐴𝐻 = ∅). In the date-1
trading equilibrium, the two investors’ trading strategies are ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝐿
𝑦 ̃𝑦 and
̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝐿

𝑦 ̃𝑦, respectively, where
√

𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿
2𝜌𝜎𝑢
(1 + 𝜌)(9 + 8𝜌)

,  𝛼𝐿

𝑣 =

𝛽𝐿
𝑦 =

√

3𝜎𝑢
√

1 + 𝜌
9 + 8𝜌

, and 𝛼𝐿

𝑦 = −

𝜌𝜎𝑢
(1 + 𝜌)(9 + 8𝜌)

√

,

and the market maker’s pricing rule is ̃𝑝 = 𝜆𝐿 ̃𝜔, where

√

𝜆𝐿 =

6𝜎𝑢

9 + 8𝜌
√
1 + 𝜌

.

(7)

(8)

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

The above equation clearly demonstrates how investor H can use the
shared  information ̃𝑦 to  improve  his  investment  decisions.  The  first
term states that, in principle, H can use ̃𝑦 to forecast asset fundamental
̃𝑣, pushing H to trade on the shared information in the same direction as
L. We label this term as the ‘‘forecasting-fundamental effect’’. Since in
our baseline model, H knows ̃𝑣 perfectly, ̃𝑦 does not generate additional
value through this term, and thus, this forecasting-fundamental effect
is inactive in the baseline model.4

The second term in Eq. (10) states that H can use ̃𝑦 to forecast L’s
order flow ̃𝑥𝐿, which pushes H to trade on the shared information in
the  opposite  direction  of  L.5 We  refer  to  this  term  as  the  ‘‘trading-
against-error  effect’’  because  it  captures  that  H  trades  against  the
error component ̃𝑒 in L’s signal ̃𝑦. Intuitively, investor H can use his
knowledge of ̃𝑣 and ̃𝑦 to back out ̃𝑒 and thus, information set { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦} is
equivalent to information set { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑒}. So, we can re-express H’s trading
strategy as follows:
(
𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿
𝛼𝐿
𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿
̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝐿

̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿

𝑦 ̃𝑦 =

(11)

𝑦 ̃𝑒.

)

𝑦

The term 𝛼𝐿
𝑦 ̃𝑒 with 𝛼𝑦 < 0 in Eq. (11) captures the fact that investor
H trades against the error ̃𝑒. Intuitively, investor L cannot disentangle
fundamental ̃𝑣 from error ̃𝑒 in his signal ̃𝑦, while investor H can. The
error-driven trading by L resembles ‘‘dumb money’’ to investor H, and
trading against dumb money earns H extra profits. Specifically, given
fundamentals ̃𝑣, when ̃𝑒 is positive, investor L will buy more, thereby
pushing up asset price; H knows that this price increase is not driven
by  fundamentals,  so  he  will  sell  accordingly.  Conversely,  when ̃𝑒 is
negative, investor L will sell the extra risky asset, pressing down the
price;  at  this  low  price,  H  will  buy  since  he  knows  that  the  asset
fundamental has not changed.

In  principle,  there  are
Subgame  3:  H  shares  information  (𝐴𝐻 = 𝑆).
two subgames when H shares information, depending on whether L
shares his information. Nonetheless, it turns out that the equilibrium
in these two subgames is the same because H owns perfect information
about the asset fundamental, and once he shares it with L, L no longer
uses his own noisy signal ̃𝑦 in predicting the asset fundamental and
thus does not trade on ̃𝑦. Thus, regardless of L’s information-sharing
decision, once H shares information, the trading game degenerates to
the classical Kyle (1985) setting with two perfectly informed traders.
We summarize the trading equilibrium in the following lemma and use
the superscript ‘‘H’’ to indicate the fact that H shares information while
L either shares or does not share information.

Lemma 3 (H Shares Information). Suppose H shares information on date
0 (i.e., 𝐴𝐻 = 𝑆). In the date-1 trading equilibrium, regardless of L’s date-0
information-sharing decision, the two investors’ date-1 trading strategies are
̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝐻
𝛽𝐻
𝑣 = 𝛼𝐻

𝑣 ̃𝑣, where

𝑣 ̃𝑣 and ̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝐻
𝜎𝑢
,
𝑣 =
√
2

(12)

and the market maker’s pricing rule is ̃𝑝 = 𝜆𝐻 ̃𝜔, where

.

(13)

The two investors’ date-0 unconditional expected profits evaluated at the
date-1 trading equilibrium are, respectively:

𝜋𝐿
𝐿 =

√
3

2𝜌𝜎𝑢

(1 + 𝜌)(9 + 8𝜌)

and 𝜋𝐿

𝐻 =

√
6

(9 + 4𝜌)𝜎𝑢
(1 + 𝜌)(9 + 8𝜌)

.

(9)

𝜆𝐻 =

√
2
3𝜎𝑢

One notable finding in Lemma 2 is that H trades against the infor-
mation shared by L (i.e., 𝛼𝐿
𝑦 < 0), which underlies the key mechanism
that drives L’s information-sharing incentives in our setting. This result
can be best seen from the first-order condition (FOC) of the H investor’s
profit  maximization  problem.  Inserting  the  market  maker’s  pricing
rule into Eq. (2), we can compute H’s conditional expected profit as
̃𝑥𝐻 𝐸 ( ̃𝑣 − 𝜆𝐿 ̃𝑥𝐿| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦)
1
𝐸 ( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦)
̃𝑥𝐻 =
2𝜆𝐿
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Forecasting fundamental

𝐻 . Taking the FOC, we obtain that
.

𝐸 ( ̃𝑥𝐿| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦)
−
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Trading against error

− 𝜆𝐿 ̃𝑥2

(10)

1
2

5 

4 Formally, in the baseline model, we have 𝐸 ( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦) = 𝐸 ( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑣) = ̃𝑣 and thus,
𝜕 𝐸( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦)
= 0. In Section 4.1, we will explore an extension in which investor
𝜕 ̃𝑦
H has imperfect information about ̃𝑣. There, the information shared by L is
also helpful for H to predict ̃𝑣, thereby making the forecasting-fundamental
effect  active.  Still,  our  result  continues  to  hold  as  long  as  H’s  information
is sufficiently precise, and the result is still driven by the fact that H trades
against the information shared by L.
𝐸 ( ̃𝑥𝐿| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦)

5 We can show that − 1
2

= − 1
2

𝛽𝐿
𝑦
2

𝐸 ( ̃𝑥𝐿| ̃𝑦)
[
𝑦 = 𝜕
𝜕 ̃𝑦

= −
𝐸 ( ̃𝑥𝐿| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦)]
− 1
2

̃𝑦. Since 𝛽𝐿
= −

𝑦 > 0 (L
< 0.

𝛽𝐿
𝑦
2

always trades on his information), we have 𝛼𝐿

I. Goldstein et al.

The two investors’ date-0 unconditional expected profits evaluated at the
date-1 trading equilibrium are, respectively:
𝐿 = 𝜋𝐻
𝜋𝐻

𝐻 =

(14)

.

𝜎𝑢
√
3

2

3.1.2.  Equilibrium at the information-sharing stage

We now go back to date 0 to analyze investors’ information-sharing
decisions. The equilibrium profits summarized in Lemmas 1–3 describe
investors’ payoffs in this information-sharing game. We plot the payoff
matrix of this game in Fig. 2. In each entry of the payoff matrix, the
first input represents L’s payoff, while the second input represents H’s
payoff.

𝐻 >  𝜋𝐻

𝐻 >  𝜋𝐻

𝐻 and 𝜋𝐿

By comparing H’s expected profit across Lemmas 1–3, we notice
that  H’s  payoff  is  higher  if  he  keeps  secret  no  matter  whether  L
shares  information  (i.e., 𝜋𝑁
𝐻 ).  As  a  result,  H’s
dominant strategy is not to share information. This result is intuitive
and expected: Once H shares his information with L, L becomes per-
fectly informed about the asset fundamental as well; the two perfectly
informed investors compete very fiercely in the financial market, which
significantly lowers H’s trading profit. In other words, the forecasting-
fundamental  effect  dominates  for  H,  discouraging  him  from  sharing
information.

𝐿 and 𝜋𝐿
𝐿 > 𝜋𝑁

Given that H chooses not to share information in equilibrium, we
use the expressions of 𝜋𝑁
𝐿 in Lemmas 1 and 2 to examine L’s best
response. We find that 𝜋𝐿
𝐿 ; that is, L makes a higher trading profit
when sharing information. So, in our economy, information transmits
from the less informed investor to the more informed one, rather than
in the opposite direction as commonly considered in the literature (e.g.,
Benabou  and  Laroque, 1992; Van  Bommel, 2003; Indjejikian  et  al.,
2014; Ljungqvist and Qian, 2016; Schmidt, 2019). This result is sur-
prising, and its driving force is the novel trading-against-error effect
discussed above.

To understand the intuitions for this result, we note that information
sharing has two effects on L’s profit. First, trading against error by H
implies that H trades against L’s information, which reduces L’s price
impact and thus directly benefits L. Second, there is an indirect effect
induced  by  further  changes  in  investors’  trading  strategies  and  the
market maker’s pricing rule.6 Specifically, in response to information
sharing, L trades more aggressively since H’s trading against L’s infor-
mation makes the price less sensitive to L’s information. In addition, the
more aggressive trading by L forces H to trade less aggressively. These
changes in investors’ trading aggressiveness benefit investor L. After
L shares information, the overall order flow contains more informed
trades (even though informed trade is partially offset by less aggressive
trading by H). The market maker faces more serious adverse selection
risk and so steepens the pricing schedule, which hurts both investors L
and H. Nonetheless, this negative effect due to price impact is weaker
than the positive effect due to trading aggressiveness so that overall, L
is better off from changes in trading and pricing rules. The following
proposition summarizes the above discussions.

[

(

𝐸

))

̃𝑥𝐻

̃𝑣 − 𝜆𝑁

6 We  can  formalize  these  two  effects  as  follows.  Fixing  L’s  trading
and  the  market  maker’s  price  impact  at 𝜆𝑁 ,  we  compute
rule  at 𝛽𝑁
𝑦
H’s  optimal  trading  rule  in  response  to  information  sharing:
=
]
(
ar g max ̃𝑥𝐻
| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦
̃𝑦. With this optimal
̃𝑥𝐻 + 𝛽𝑁
𝑦 ̃𝑦
trading rule by H (but the same trading rule by L and pricing rule by the
)]
market maker), L’s profit becomes 𝜋𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡
.
The  direct  effect  is  then  given  by 𝜋𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡
𝐿 ,  which  can  be  shown  to  be
𝐿 is  L’s
positive.  The  indirect  effect  is  captured  by 𝜋𝐿
equilibrium  profit  computed  when  both  investors  and  the  market  maker
optimize in response to information sharing. We can show that the indirect
effect is also positive: 𝜋𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡

(
̃𝑣 − 𝜆𝑁 ̃𝑥𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡

𝐿 − 𝜋𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡

,  where 𝜋𝐿

= 𝐸
− 𝜋𝑁

− 𝜆𝑁 𝛽𝑁
𝑦 ̃𝑦

2𝜆𝑁 ̃𝑣 −

̃𝑥𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡

= 1

𝛽𝑁
𝑦 ̃𝑦

− 𝜋𝑁

𝛽𝑁
𝑦
2

[

𝐻

𝐻

𝐿

𝐿

𝐿

𝐿 > 0.

𝐿

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium information sharing in financial markets). On
date 0, there exists a unique information-sharing equilibrium in which L
shares  his  private  information,  whereas  H  does  not  (i.e., 𝐴∗
𝐿 = 𝑆 and
𝐻 = ∅). On date 1, investors’ equilibrium trading rules and the market
𝐴∗
maker’s equilibrium pricing rule are characterized by Lemma 2.

3.2.  Implications of information sharing

We  now  examine  the  effect  of  information  sharing  on  investors’
profits and market quality by comparing our economy with endogenous
information sharing (as described by Proposition 1) to a benchmark
economy with no information sharing (as described by Lemma 1).

The most surprising profit result is that H actually becomes worse
off in equilibrium, although he is receiving additional information. Like
the analysis of L’s profit, information sharing also has a direct and an
indirect  effect  on  H’s  profit.  First,  by  observing  and  trading  against
L’s shared information, H makes more profits from identifying more
trading opportunities from the expected difference between fundamen-
tal value and price, holding constant investor L’s trading rule and the
market maker’s pricing rule. This direct effect on H’s profit has the same
sign as the direct effect on L’s profit, but for a different reason. Second,
unlike the indirect effect on L’s profit, the indirect effect on H’s profit is
negative: As we discussed in the previous subsection, due to the trading-
against-error effect, information sharing causes the L investor to trade
more aggressively, the H investor to trade less aggressively, and the
market maker to steepen the pricing schedule, all of which adversely
affect H’s trading profit.

We can show that the negative indirect effect dominates the positive
direct effect so that H becomes worse off in equilibrium.7 Intuitively,
L’s information quality is relatively poor, so he does not pose a serious
threat to H’s trading. The direct benefit of H knowing L’s information
and predicting L’s order flow is limited. By contrast, H, as the most
informed investor, grabs the most profit share from the market, and
thus, any adjustment in the price schedule by the market maker will
significantly  harm  the  H  investor,  which  implies  that  the  negative
indirect effect is relatively significant.

The problem for H is that once the information is shared, he finds it
optimal to use it ex post. Ex ante, if investor H could commit not to use
the received information from L, he would have been better off. How-
ever, the inability to make this commitment changes the equilibrium
behavior, generating negative effects on H’s profit. In Section 4.3, we
will further examine this commitment issue by considering an extended
economy with multiple H-investors and find that in that extension, H-
investors may choose not to commit even if they can make a credible
commitment.

As discussed in the previous subsection, information sharing bene-
fits investor L, which is why the L investor endogenously chooses to
share  information  in  equilibrium.  When  H  and  L  are  combined,  the
whole investor side makes more profits after information sharing. In
other words, what L gains exceeds what H loses. For example, when
𝜌 = 𝜎𝑢 = 1, by sharing information, L’s profit increases by 32.7%, H’s
profit drops by 4.1%, and the two investors’ total profit increases by
2.6%.

Thinking beyond the direction of information sharing and its impli-
cations for investor profits, it is important to examine the implications
for  key  market  quality  variables,  such  as  market  efficiency,  market
liquidity, and trading volume. We measure market efficiency using the
1
precision of the asset payoff conditional on asset price, i.e., 𝑚 ≡
.
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑝)
After information sharing, the total order flow becomes more correlated
with the fundamental, so the price aggregates more fundamental in-
formation. This increase in price informativeness arises from the fact

7 We can conduct a similar exercise as in Footnote 3.1.2 and formalize the
𝐻 −𝜋𝑁
𝐻 ,
, which is negative and

direct and indirect effects on H’s profit. The direct effect is given by 𝜋𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡
which is positive. The indirect effect is 𝜋𝐿
dominant, so that the total effect 𝜋𝐿

𝐻 − 𝜋𝑑 𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐 𝑡
𝐻 is negative.

𝐻 − 𝜋𝑁

𝐻

6 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Fig. 2. Payoff matrix of the date-0 information sharing game.

that  L  is  trading  more  aggressively  on  his  signal  and  H  is  trading
against the noise. Market liquidity is captured by Kyle’s 𝜆, an inverse
measure  of  market  depth:  More  liquid  markets  have  a  smaller 𝜆.  A
direct implication of the increasing informed trades in the total order
flow is that the market maker raises the price impact to manage the
increasing adverse selection risk, dampening market liquidity.

(

])

𝐸[

| ̃𝑥𝐻 | + | ̃𝑥𝐿| + | ̃𝜔| + | ̃𝑢|

Finally,  we  follow Vives (2010)  and  measure  the  total  volume
traded, denoted by 𝑇 𝑉 , by the sum of the expected absolute value of
the  trading  from  different  agents  in  the  model  divided  by 2: 𝑇 𝑉 ≡
1
. When examining each agent’s trading
2
volume, we find that after information sharing, since L trades more
aggressively and H trades less aggressively, L’s trading volume increases
whereas H’s volume decreases; that is, 𝐸 [
increases but 𝐸(| ̃𝑥𝐻 |)
decreases. Meanwhile, the market maker’s trading volume decreases;
namely, 𝐸(| ̃𝜔|) decreases.  In  terms  of  the  total  trading  volume 𝑇 𝑉 ,
when L’s information precision 𝜌 is sufficiently low, L’s signal has a
significant amount of noise and hence the trading-against-error effect
is strong; so, L trades much more aggressively after information sharing,
thereby  driving  up  the  total  trading  volume.  However,  when 𝜌 is
sufficiently high, the trading-against-error effect is diminished, and the
increase in L’s trading volume is mild. As a result, the total trading
volume decreases after information sharing. Proposition 2 summarizes
the above results.

]
| ̃𝑥𝐿|

Proposition 2 (Implications of information sharing). Compared with the
benchmark  economy  without  information  sharing,  in  our  economy  with
endogenous information sharing:

𝐿 , 𝜋𝐿

𝐿 > 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 < 𝜋𝑁

that is, 𝜋𝐿

(1) L is better off, H is worse off, and their combined profit is higher;
𝐻 , and 𝜋𝐿
(2) Market  efficiency  is  higher  and  market  liquidity  is  lower;  that  is,
𝑚𝐿 > 𝑚𝑁 and 𝜆𝐿 > 𝜆𝑁 . When 𝜌 is sufficiently low (𝜌 → 0), trading
volume increases (i.e., 𝑇 𝑉 𝐿 >  𝑇 𝑉 𝑁 ); when 𝜌 is sufficiently high
(𝜌 → ∞), trading volume decreases (i.e., 𝑇 𝑉 𝐿 < 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁 ).

𝐻 + 𝜋𝑁
𝐿 .

𝐿 > 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 + 𝜋𝐿

4.  Extensions and variations

Our baseline model derives the key insights in a simple framework.
While these results may not always hold, this section examines various
extensions and variations to demonstrate the robustness of our findings
and explore other dimensions that influence information sharing.

4.1.  Imperfectly informed H-investor

Fig. 3. Information sharing between imperfectly informed investors.

) and 𝜌𝑖 ∈ (0, +∞], for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2},

which information can be transmitted between imperfectly informed
investors.  We  consider  two  investors,  denoted  by 1 and 2,  who  are
endowed  with  private  information  about
̃𝑣 with  different  precision
levels. Specifically, investor 𝑖 receives the following private signal:
̃𝑦𝑖 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝑒𝑖, with ̃𝑒𝑖 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜌−1
𝑖
where { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑒1, ̃𝑒2} are mutually independent. Parameter 𝜌𝑖 controls in-
vestor 𝑖’s  information  quality.  If 𝜌1 >  𝜌2,  investor 1 is  more  in-
formed  than  investor 2.  The  baseline  model  is  nested  by  assuming
that  one  investor’s  information  precision  is  infinity  and  the  other
investor’ information precision is finite. All of our other assumptions
remain  unchanged  from  the  baseline  model.  The  following  proposi-
tion summarizes the equilibrium information sharing in this extended
economy.

Proposition  3 (Information  sharing  between  imperfectly  informed  in-
vestors). Consider  two  investors  endowed  with  private  information  with
different precision levels. Assume that investor 𝑖 is weakly more informed,
≥ 𝜌𝑗 ,  where 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈  {1, 2} and 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗.  There  exists  a  unique
i.e., 𝜌𝑖
information-sharing equilibrium in which

(1) Investor 𝑖 never shares information, i.e., 𝐴∗
(2) If 𝜌𝑖

otherwise, investor 𝑗 does not share information, i.e., 𝐴∗

≡ 2(𝜌𝑗 + 1), then investor 𝑗 shares information, i.e., 𝐴∗
𝑗 = ∅.

𝑖 = ∅;

≥ ̂𝜌𝑖

𝑗 = 𝑆;

To  show  our  results  most  clearly,  in  the  baseline  model,  H  is
assumed  to  have  perfect  information  about  the  asset  fundamental.
We here relax this assumption and consider the more general case in

Fig.  3 graphically  illustrates Proposition  3 by  plotting  the  two
investors’ equilibrium information-sharing behaviors against the pre-
cision  levels  of  their  endowed  information.  Neither  investor  shares
information when the two investors’ information precision levels are

7 

I. Goldstein et al.

close to each other. This finding is consistent with Balasubramaniam
(2024)’s no information sharing result without disagreement, which is
a special case of our Proposition 3. In contrast, when one investor’s
information is sufficiently better than the other investor’s information,
the better informed investor keeps secret, and the less informed investor
starts to share information with the other investor.

Similar  to  the  baseline  model,  information  sharing  by  the  less
informed investor is driven by the possibility that the more informed
investor  trades  against  the  information  shared  by  the  less  informed
investor. Without loss of generality, let us consider the case in which
≥ 𝜌2 so that investor 2 (as the L-investor) shares his information with
𝜌1
investor 1 (as the H-investor). After information sharing, the two in-
vestors’ equilibrium trading strategies are respectively as follows: ̃𝑥1 =
̃𝑦2 and ̃𝑥2 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦2. Similar to Eq. (10) in the baseline model,
𝛼𝑦1
we can examine the more informed investor 1’s profit maximization
problem and compute his optimal trading as follows:

̃𝑦1 + 𝛼𝑦2

.

)

)

1
2

(15)

̃𝑥1 =

1
𝐸 ( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2
2𝜆
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Forecasting fundamental

𝐸 ( ̃𝑥2| ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2
−
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Trading against error
The more informed investor 1 uses information ̃𝑦2 both for predicting
asset fundamentals ̃𝑣 and for predicting the less informed investor 2’s
order flow ̃𝑥2. These two ways of using ̃𝑦2 affect investor 1’s optimal
1
trading ̃𝑥1 in opposite ways:
2𝜆(1+𝜌1+𝜌2)2 > 0 (the
2𝜆
)]
‘‘forecasting fundamental effect’’); and 𝜕
< 0
𝜕 ̃𝑦2
(the ‘‘trading-against-error’’ effect).

𝐸 ( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2
[
− 1
2

=
𝐸 ( ̃𝑥2| ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2

= −

𝜕
𝜕 ̃𝑦2

1+𝜌1

𝛽𝑦
2

)

Investor 1 (the more informed investor) trades against information
̃𝑦2 shared by investor 2 (the less informed investor) if and only if he
uses ̃𝑦2 primarily for predicting investor 2’s order flow ̃𝑥2 (i.e., 𝛼𝑦2
< 0
)]|
) < |
𝜕
if and only if
). This will be
|
|
𝜕 ̃𝑦2
|
|
|
|
true when 𝜌1 is sufficiently high such that investor 1’s own information
̃𝑦1 already provides a very accurate estimation about ̃𝑣. Formally, we
can compute that

𝐸 ( ̃𝑥2| ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2

𝐸 ( ̃𝑣| ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2

[
− 1
2

𝜕
𝜕 ̃𝑦2

1
2𝜆

𝛼𝑦1

=

𝛼𝑦2

=

𝛽𝑦 =

𝜌1
2𝜆(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

> 0,

𝜌2(2 + 2𝜌2 − 𝜌1)
6𝜆(1 + 𝜌1)(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

𝜌2
3𝜆(1 + 𝜌2)

> 0.

< 0 iff 𝜌1 > ̂𝜌1

≡ 2(1 + 𝜌2),

< 0 if  and  only  if 𝜌1 >  ̂𝜌1

≡ 2(1 + 𝜌2).  Note  that  the
Thus, 𝛼𝑦2
threshold ̂𝜌1 takes the same value as the threshold in Proposition 3,
which determines whether investor 2 optimally shares his information
in  equilibrium.  Taken  together,  similar  to  the  baseline  model,  the
less informed investor shares his information if and only if the more
informed investor trades against the shared information.

4.2.  Ex post information sharing

In  the  baseline  model,  for  tractability  reasons,  investors  are  as-
sumed  to  make  information-sharing  decisions  before  observing  their
private information (see Fig. 1). This assumption removes any signaling
motives  of  the  information  sender.  In  this  subsection,  we  consider
an alternative setting in which, each investor decides whether or not
to  share  information  after  observing  the  realization  of  their  private
information. All of our other assumptions remain unchanged from the
baseline model.

We use 𝐷𝑖 to denote investor 𝑖’s information-sharing set of signal
realizations, where 𝑖 ∈ {𝐻 , 𝐿}. Take investor L as an example. When
the realization of L’s private signal ̃𝑦 belongs to set 𝐷𝐿, L truthfully
shares ̃𝑦 with H; otherwise, L does not reveal any of his information.
In principle, 𝐷𝑖 can take any form. In our analysis, we focus only on
the ‘‘corner’’ equilibrium in which 𝐷𝑖 is either empty (i.e., investor 𝑖
never shares information after observing the signal realization) or the
entire real line (i.e., investor 𝑖 always shares information after observ-
ing the signal realization). This is because if an equilibrium involves

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

‘‘interior’’ information-sharing sets (i.e., investor 𝑖 shares information
for some signal realizations but does not for other signal realizations),
then the equilibrium linearity breaks down, which precludes analytical
tractability.

In  this  ex  post  information  sharing  setting,  we  must  also  deal
with off-equilibrium beliefs. We take the passive-belief approach that
is  commonly  adopted  in  the  signaling  literature  (e.g., McAfee  and
Schwartz, 1994). That is, upon observing a deviation from an investor’s
equilibrium  information-sharing  decision,  other  market  participants
do not update their beliefs regarding the distribution of the deviant
investor’s  private  signal.  One  justification  is  that  they  interpret  the
deviation as a tremble and assume that trembles are uncorrelated with
the investor’s information.

The following proposition summarizes the findings under ex post

information sharing.

Proposition 4 (Ex post information sharing).
In the economy in which
investors make information-sharing decisions after observing the realizations
of their private signals, the following statements hold:

(1) That  neither  L  nor  H  shares  information  cannot  be  sustained  in
equilibrium (i.e., ‘‘someone must share information in equilibrium’’).
(2) That H shares his information cannot be sustained in equilibrium

(i.e., ‘‘H never shares information in equilibrium’’).

(3) There exists an equilibrium in which L always fully shares informa-
tion, whereas H never shares information (i.e., ‘‘the equilibrium in
the baseline model with ex ante information sharing continues to be
an equilibrium in this variation economy’’).

Part  (1)  of Proposition  4 states  that  in  the  ex  post  information-
sharing  setting,  if  an  equilibrium  exists,  there  must  be  information
transmitted between the two investors. That is, silence cannot be sus-
tained in equilibrium. Parts (2) and (3) further state that relative to H,
L has more incentives to share information. Thus, information transmits
generically from L to H. Intuitively, as any information sharing by the
more informed investor only dissipates his information advantage, H
never shares information. By contrast, due to the trading-against-error
effect, there always exists an equilibrium in which L shares information
with H regardless of the signal realization. The mechanism remains the
same as in the baseline model, namely, the trading-against-error effect.

4.3.  H: ‘‘I Am Not Listening’’

In the baseline model, H is overall worse off in the information-
sharing economy. An important observation then is that if possible, H
would commit not to listen to the information. For instance, investors
choose not to register for the online investment community SumZero.
Alternatively,  they  choose  not  to  participate  in  the  investment  con-
ferences, which have emerged as a hallmark event in the investment
management industry (Luo, 2018). However, when there are multiple
H investors, it is unclear whether they will commit because they do
not fully internalize the negative effect of trading against the shared
information.

To examine this issue, we extend the model with a number 𝑀 of
H-investors and allow them to simultaneously decide, at the beginning
of  date  0,  whether  to  invest  in  a  costless  technology  that  credibly
commits not to use any shared information at the trading stage. After
the commitment investment decisions are made, L decides whether to
share  information  with  all  H-investors.  Other  features  of  the  model
remain unchanged.

Although  we  cannot  characterize  all  equilibria  in  this  extended
economy, we can identify two important findings about commitment
adoption. First, when there are more than three H investors, it is not an
equilibrium that every H investor adopts the commitment technology.
Intuitively, when other H investors adopt the commitment technology,
one H investor can deviate to using the information shared by L and

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Fig. 4. Multiple Ls and Hs.

enjoy its incremental value without fully accounting for its impact on
L’s  trading  and  the  market  maker’s  price  schedule.  Second,  for  the
same reason, we can show that when there are sufficiently many H
investors, it is always an equilibrium in which each H does not adopt
the commitment technology on date 0 and hence will use L’s shared
information on date 1. In addition, these H investors would be better
off if they all could commit not to use the information shared by L.
Taken together, there is essentially a coordination problem among the
H investors that prevents the adoption of the commitment technology.

Proposition 5. Suppose that there are a number 𝑀 of 𝐻s and one 𝐿 and
that each 𝐻 simultaneously chooses whether to adopt a costless commitment
technology. The following statements hold:

(2) There exists a constant

(1) When 𝑀 > 3, there does not exist an equilibrium in which 𝐿 shares
information and every 𝐻 commits not to use the shared information.
̂𝑀 > 0 such that when 𝑀 > ̂𝑀, there exists
an equilibrium in which 𝐿 shares information and all 𝐻s use 𝐿’s
shared information. In addition, 𝐻s’ profits would be higher had they
all committed not to use the shared information.

4.4.  Multiple L and H investors

In  practice,  there  are  typically  fewer  highly  informed  investors
than imprecisely informed investors in financial markets. To enhance
the empirical relevance of our model, we consider an extension that
incorporates multiple L investors and H investors, with a focus on the
scenario in which the number of L investors exceeds that of H investors.
There are two groups of investors: (i) a number 𝑀 of Hs, denoted by
𝐻1, . . . , 𝐻𝑀 , and (ii) a number 𝑁 of Ls, denoted by 𝐿1, . . . , 𝐿𝑁 , where
𝑀 and 𝑁 are integers. All Hs observe ̃𝑣 perfectly whereas investor 𝐿𝑛,
where 𝑛 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁}, only observes a noisy signal:
̃𝑦𝑛 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝜂 + ̃𝑒𝑛, with ̃𝜂 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜉−1) and ̃𝑒𝑛 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜌−1).
The  signal  structure (16) introduces  common  noise ̃𝜂 into  Ls’  infor-
mation and thus allows for information correlation among them. One
can interpret that the common noise represents the sentiment among
the coarsely informed investors, e.g., the market sentiment revealed
through social media. As in Section 4.3, we focus on Ls’ information-
sharing behavior; moreover, once an L shares information, this signal

(16)

becomes observed by all Hs and the other peer Ls. The baseline model
is thus nested by setting 𝑀 = 𝑁 = 1 and 𝜉 = ∞.

We use numerical analyses to demonstrate that information sharing
remains a prevalent phenomenon despite the presence of a large num-
ber of Ls. Denote 𝑁1 as the number of Ls who share information. Panels
(a) and (b) of Fig. 4 plot three types of Ls’ information-sharing behavior
in the parameter space of 𝑀 and 𝑁 for different values of 𝜉: (i) None
of Ls shares information (i.e., 𝑁 ∗
1 = 0, marked by ‘‘x’’); (ii) all Ls share
1 = 𝑁, marked by ‘‘o’’); and (iii) only a fraction of
information (i.e., 𝑁 ∗
< 𝑁, marked by ‘‘+’’).
Ls share information (i.e., 0 < 𝑁 ∗
1

We  show  that  when  there  are  a  large  number  of  Ls  but  a  small
number  of  Hs  (i.e.,  high 𝑁 but  low 𝑀),  none  of  the  Ls  is  willing
to share information in equilibrium. This is intuitive because in the
presence of multiple Ls, revealing private information to other peer Ls
dissipates an L’s informational advantage, and with a small number of
Hs, the trading-against-error effect is diminished; both forces discour-
age Ls from sharing their information. Furthermore, in Panel (c) of the
figure, we fix the number of H investors at 5 and explore how the Ls’
information-sharing incentive changes as the number of Ls increases.
Again, consistent with the dissipation of information advantage, the
panel shows that the fraction of Ls that share information decreases
as the number of L investors increases.

In  addition,  the  comparison  of  Panels  (a)  and  (b)  of Fig.  4 re-
veals that Ls’ information-sharing incentives are strengthened when the
common noise ̃𝜂 is an important component (i.e., low 𝜉). That is, the
region with no information sharing shrinks when 𝜉 decreases. For low
𝜉, sharing information and inviting Hs to trade against the common
noise ̃𝜂 becomes  a  common  interest  among  Ls,  thereby  sustaining
the coordination-type equilibrium in which several Ls are willing to
share private information despite the potential loss of informational
advantage to peers.

4.5.  Publicly shared information

In the baseline model, information sharing can occur only between
the two rational investors. This treatment captures the empirical setting
of  private  communication  among  investors  (sometimes  called  ‘‘mar-
ket  chatters’’  in  practice;  see  Section 5.1 for  more  discussions).  As
mentioned in the Introduction, there are other realistic settings of infor-
mation communication, such as social media communications, in which

9 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Fig. 5. Publicly shared information.

a large number of market participants observe the shared information.
So  it  is  important  to  ask  what  happens  if  the  information  is  shared
publicly.  Since  the  market  maker  in  our  model  can  be  interpreted
as  a  reduced  form  to  aggregate  the  general  public,  we  now  extend
our baseline model to allow the market maker to observe the shared
information.

Our analysis focuses on L’s information-sharing behavior. To nest
our baseline model, we assume that investors and the market maker
have  different  capabilities  in  interpreting  the  same  signal.  We  fol-
low Myatt and Wallace (2012) and introduce ‘‘receiver noise’’ to the
shared signal. Specifically, if investor L shares information ̃𝑦, investor
H and the market maker then observe, respectively,
̃𝑞𝐻 = ̃𝑦 + ̃𝜁𝐻 and ̃𝑞𝑀 = ̃𝑦 + ̃𝜁𝑀 ,
where ̃𝜁𝐻 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜒 −1
𝑀 ) with 𝜒𝐻 ∈  [0, ∞] and
𝜒𝑀 ∈ [0, ∞]. The random variables { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑒, ̃𝜁𝐻 , ̃𝜁𝑀 } are mutually indepen-
dent. The two constants 𝜒𝐻 and 𝜒𝑀 respectively capture the signal-
interpretation capabilities of the H-investor and the market maker. The
baseline model corresponds to 𝜒𝐻 = ∞ (i.e., H can perfectly interpret
L’s shared information) and 𝜒𝑀 =  0 (i.e., the market maker cannot
process L’s shared information).

𝐻 ) and ̃𝜁𝑀 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜒 −1

We  first  observe  that  information  sharing  will  not  occur  when
there is no receiver noise for the H investor and the market maker,
as summarized in Part (1) of Proposition 6. If the market maker can
perfectly observe the shared information, H will not use it, leaving no
incentives for L to share information in the first place.

Proposition 6 (Publicly shared information). Suppose the market maker
can also observe the shared information.

(1) If there is no receiver noise for the H investor and the market maker,

L does not share any information.

(2) However, if there is receiver noise for the H investor or the market
maker,  the  behavior  of  L  depends  on  the  value  of 𝜌, 𝜒𝐻 ,  and
𝜒𝑀 . When 𝜌 is sufficiently large (i.e., 𝜌 → ∞), L does not share
information.  Otherwise,  L  may  share  information  for  sufficiently
large 𝜒𝐻 and sufficiently small 𝜒𝑀 (i.e., 𝜒𝐻 → ∞ and 𝜒𝑀 → 0).

We further use Fig. 5 to characterize L’s equilibrium information-
sharing behavior when there is receiver noise. The shaded area indi-
𝐿 = 𝑆), and the blank
cates the region in which L shares information (𝐴∗

𝐿 =  ∅).  We  find  that
area  is  the  one  in  which  L  does  not  share  (𝐴∗
when H has a superior ability than the market maker in interpreting the
shared information (i.e., small 𝜒𝑀 and large 𝜒𝐻 ), L is willing to share
information  despite  the  potential  information  leakage  to  the  market
maker. The trading-against-error effect still drives the result; that is,
by  sharing  private  information  and  inviting  H  to  trade  against  it,  L
has his order flow partially offset and obtains a better execution price.
The condition of small 𝜒𝑀 and large 𝜒𝐻 could hold in practice due
to the specialization of different agents (the market maker focuses on
making the market, whereas strategic investors specialize in collecting
information  to  inform  trading).  In  addition, Fig.  5 shows  that  as  L
owns more precise information (𝜌 increases), he is less likely to share
information. This is because, with less error in the endowed informa-
tion, L benefits less from the trading-against-error effect in information
sharing. Sharing precise information can also expose L’s information to
the market maker, ultimately diminishing his potential trading profits.
These result are summarized in Part (2) of Proposition 6.

4.6.  Other extensions

In  addition  to  the  extensions  and  variations  that  are  described
above, we provide two additional extensions in the online appendix:
(i) endogenous information acquisition by the L investor; and (ii) three
differentially informed investors. Overall, our results are robust in these
extensions. Specifically, there exists endogenous information sharing
by less informed investors in a wide range of parameter values, and
the  information-sharing  incentives  are  driven  by  the  more  informed
investor trading against the shared information.

We  now  summarize  some  new  results  in  these  two  extensions.
In the extension of endogenous information acquisition, we find that
information sharing has an ambiguous effect on L’s information acqui-
sition. On the one hand, relative to the benchmark without information
sharing,  by  sharing  information  L  can  make  more  profits  and  thus
afford  to  acquire  more  information  to  inform  his  trading  decisions.
On the other hand, L’s private information becomes more similar to
H’s after acquiring more precise information, which tends to depress
L’s information-acquisition incentives. In the extension with three dif-
ferentially informed investors (one perfectly informed investor H and
two coarsely informed investors L1 and L2), the least informed investor
always has the strongest incentive to share information, because the

10 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

least informed investor can gain the most from the trading-against-error
effect.

5.  Applications

We now use our analysis of the baseline model in Section 2 and the
extension in Section 4.5 to shed light on private and public information
communication among investors.

5.1.  Market chatters: Private communication among investors

In  practice,  market  participants  are  known  to  swap  information
privately among themselves, and they are often called ‘‘market chat-
ters’’  (see,  e.g., Zaloom, 2003).  More  broadly,  word-of-mouth  com-
munication is prevalent in transmitting information in financial mar-
kets (e.g., Shiller and Pound, 1989; Hong et al., 2005; Brown et al.,
2008; Kaustia and Knüpfer, 2012; Hvide and Östberg, 2015; Pool et al.,
2015; Heimer, 2016).

With  the  advent  of  emerging  technologies,  professional  investors
have embraced the practice of sharing information on the internet. An
exemplary platform in this regard is SumZero.com, which serves as a
private online community exclusively for verified buy-side investment
professionals. SumZero describes itself as the leading global community
for  hedge  fund  and  mutual  fund  investment  professionals,  boasting
representation from nearly every major hedge fund in its user base.
Members of SumZero gain access to a vast database comprising thou-
sands of actionable investment ideas, all authored by their peers from
other elite hedge funds and mutual funds. We will now delve into the
workings of this online community and explore how our framework
can  be  broadly  applied  to  understand  investors’  information-sharing
behavior within this private platform.

To maintain the integrity of its membership, SumZero implements
a  thorough  screening  process  for  potential  members.  To  begin  the
application process, prospective members are required to provide ba-
sic  personal  information  that  establishes  their  identity  as  buy-side
professionals. Additionally, they are encouraged to upload a résumé
and submit an investment thesis exceeding 500 words, which should
include a compelling valuation discussion. This aids in expediting the
admission  process.  Once  the  application  is  submitted,  the  SumZero
organization will contact each prospective member via telephone and
interviews  to  verify  their  credentials  as  a  professional  buy-side  in-
vestor. Upon approval for admission, investors are further encouraged
to enhance their online profiles by providing additional information
such as the name of their employer, assets under management, trading
expertise, investment style, and other relevant details.

As a member of the SumZero, investors can post their investment
reports, making them accessible to other SumZero users who also con-
tribute their own ideas. These reports are required to include essential
details such as the security, asset class, recommendation, expected time
frame, sector, country, and situation. Each investment idea posted on
SumZero must consist of a minimum of 500 words and be accompanied
by a comprehensive investment thesis. The investment thesis should
provide a clear rationale for why the security is being recommended,
including an in-depth valuation analysis that supports the recommenda-
tion. Furthermore, the investment thesis should present a variant view,
highlighting how the investment idea differs from the prevailing market
consensus.

We argue that our framework can be broadly mapped to the setting
of SumZero. Firstly, SumZero provides a private platform for investors
with  varying  levels  of  information  quality  to  exchange  investment
ideas.  Based  on  profiles  that  include  working  history,  assets  under
management,  and  past  investment  theses,  investors  can  gauge  each
other’s  information  quality.  Furthermore,  as  buy-side  professionals,
participants are often large traders whose trading activities can poten-
tially have a significant impact on market prices. This aspect is captured
by the strategic trading component in our Kyle model.

Secondly,  once  an  investor  shares  information  on  SumZero,  the
ideas  shared  tend  to  be  truthful  due  to  the  significant  reputation
cost  involved.  As  mentioned  earlier,  each  posted  investment  report
on SumZero is required to be detailed, specific, and credible. More-
over, Crawford et al. (2017) verify that the investment recommenda-
tions posted on SumZero generate significant returns. Particularly, con-
trarian buy recommendations and most sell recommendations exhibit
strong long-term returns. While it is possible for plagiarized or nonsen-
sical investment ideas to be posted, such ideas would permanently be
associated with the investor, causing harm to their reputation.

Thirdly,  while  our  basic  model  emphasizes  ex  ante  information
sharing for tractability purposes and we demonstrate the robustness of
our mechanism in the ex post setup, SumZero does exhibit certain ex
ante features. For example, members have the option to list the tickers
of firms they have extensively researched as part of their online profiles.
By doing so, investors implicitly commit to sharing their investment
ideas later on for these specific firms, irrespective of whether they are
buy or sell recommendations.

Our theory posits that less informed investors choose to share infor-
mation with more informed investors, and this notion finds empirical
support in the setting of SumZero. Specifically, Crawford et al. (2017)
find  that  investors  who  did  not  attend  a  top  10  university  or  who
are  employed  at  small  funds  are  significantly  more  likely  to  share
recommendations  on  SumZero.  If  we  consider  education  and  asset
under management as indicators of investor sophistication, this empir-
ical finding is consistent with our prediction that information-sharing
participants tend to be relatively less informed.

Of course, it is important to note that we do not claim that our
mechanism  is  more  plausible  than  other  explanations,  such  as  job
seeking or reputation building, for investors’ information sharing be-
havior. Instead, we emphasize that our framework provides a plausible
and  alternative  perspective  for  understanding  this  behavior  among
investors.

Private  communication  among  market  participants  can  manifest
in various forms, but a common characteristic seems that the shared
information may not always be of high quality. Another example of
such  communication  is  found  in  the  rise  of  investment  conferences
since 2008, which have become prominent events in the investment
management industry. Hedge fund managers often utilize these con-
ferences  as  platforms  to  present  their  investment  ideas  to  a  diverse
audience,  including  activists,  fundamental  equity  funds,  investment
advisors, and sell-side research analysts, who attend after registering
and purchasing tickets.

A  unique  dataset  collected  by Luo (2018)  on  investment  ideas
presented at these conferences reveals an interesting finding. While the
stocks pitched by hedge fund managers were deemed good ideas, as
they generated positive risk-adjusted returns both before and after the
pitches, they were not necessarily the best ideas. This is because the
same funds often purchased other stocks that could potentially yield
even better performance.

Additionally,  within  the  realm  of  corporate  prediction  markets,
Cowgill and Zitzewitz (2015) discover an optimism bias within Google’s
prediction markets. This implies that the information being shared may
not  always  be  of  high  quality.  Interestingly, Cowgill  and  Zitzewitz
(2015) also reveal that more experienced traders tend to trade against
the identified optimism bias in the prediction markets, which aligns
with our trading-against-error effect.

Taken  together,  our  analysis  speaks  to  the  incentives  and  conse-
quences  of  private  information  communication.  As  we  discussed  in
the Introduction, existing theories on information sharing do not ask
the fundamental question of who shares information with whom. Our
theory instead offers a novel perspective to understanding investors’
information-sharing  incentives  and  makes  unique  predictions  about
who shares information with whom. According to our theory, an in-
vestor with coarse information optimally chooses to share information
with well informed investors and induces them to offset his own order
flow. This has a direct implication: While information shared among
market participants can be valuable, it may not necessarily be of very
high quality, as illustrated in the aforementioned example.

11 

I. Goldstein et al.

5.2.  Public communication on social media

Social media is landscape-shifting, with its relevance in financial
markets  only  growing  (SEC, 2012).  While  there  is  increasing  inter-
est  in  analyzing  and  utilizing  investment  opinions  expressed  on  so-
cial media, the evidence regarding their usefulness is mixed. For in-
stance, Antweiler  and  Frank (2004)  and Das  and  Chen (2007)  find
that  the  volume  of  messages  on  message  boards,  such  as  Yahoo!  or
Raging Bull, is associated with stock return volatility. However, they do
not detect a strong relationship between opinions transmitted through
social media and stock returns. While Chen et al. (2014) show that
the views expressed in Seeking Alpha articles and commentaries pre-
dict stock returns and earnings surprises and Jame et al. (2016) also
discover value-relevant information within the Estimize platform, the
predictability observed in these studies tends to be more concentrated
on short horizons.

Owing to the richness of their data, Chen and Hwang (2022) are
able to analyze both the types of content that investors consume and
the types of content that investors subsequently choose to share with
their peers on Seeking Alpha. Their findings reveal that articles that are
read to the end tend to provide more accurate predictions of returns.
However,  interestingly,  the  articles  that  receive  a  higher  number  of
shares tend to be less accurate in their predictions.

As noted by Antweiler and Frank (2004), in order to understand
whether social media posts contain information or are simply noise, one
needs a theory to understand why market participants post messages
on  social  media  outlets.  Our  extension  in  Section 4.5 offers  such  a
theory and weighs in on the empirical debate. Our theory predicts that
the investment opinions on social media do contain some fundamental
information,  but  at  the  same  time,  the  information  must  be  noisy.
Specifically, investors who share their investment opinions on social
media collectively exert a price impact on financial markets (e.g., the
GameStop short squeeze in early 2021). In our model, these investors
are represented by the coarsely informed investor L. On the other hand,
the well-informed investor H refers to sophisticated investors, such as
hedge funds, who actively analyze tweets or r/wallstreetbets to extract
investment signals. As such, the opinions expressed on social media can
be seen as being transmitted from the coarsely informed investors to the
well informed ones. The predicted less precise transmitted information
aligns with the empirical observations in social media outlets.

Our model also sheds new light on the increasingly popular trading
strategies  based  on  the  sentiment  extracted  from  social  media.  For
example, a growing number of hedge funds are buying the data feeds
from Dataminr, which applies advanced analytics to the entire Twitter
‘‘fire hose’’ to detect events likely to move the market.8 Our theory sug-
gests that for investors who are not well informed, such sentiment data
might better inform their trading decisions and increase trading profits.
However, suppose the investors have already been well informed about
the fundamental of a firm, an industry, or the economy. In that case,
a subscription to the social media data feeds and trade on them can
backfire because market liquidity may worsen in response to trading
based on social media posts (see Propositions 2 and 5).

6.  Conclusion

Information sharing is prevalent in financial markets. In this paper,
we propose a theory to examine the incentives and consequences of
information  sharing  by  investors.  The  existing  theories  do  not  ask
the  question  of  who  shares  information  with  whom  and  why,  and
our  theory  fills  this  void.  Our  theory  predicts  that  an  investor  with
coarse information optimally chooses to share information with a well
informed investor, because the former benefits from the latter trading

8 ‘‘How  investors  are  using  social  media  to  make  money’’,  December  7,

2015, Fortune.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

against the shared information, which therefore dampens the former’s
price impact. By contrast, the well informed investor never shares in-
formation because doing so only dissipates his informational advantage
and erodes his profit accordingly.

Relative to the economy without information sharing, the less in-
formed investor makes more profits as he is less concerned about his
price impact and trades more aggressively. The more informed investor
paradoxically earns fewer profits despite seeing more information be-
cause he trades less aggressively on his own information and the market
maker steepens the price schedule. Market efficiency improves, market
liquidity worsens, and depending on the quality of the less informed
investor’s information, total trading volume can be higher or lower.
Overall, our model offers a novel and complementary explanation for
why investors share information in financial markets. The equilibrium
exhibits  the  unique  feature  that  information  transmits  from  the  less
informed investor to the more informed investor.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Itay  Goldstein: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original
draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Methodology,  Funding
acquisition,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization. Yan  Xiong: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Liyan Yang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Val-
idation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

Itay Goldstein has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Yan Xiong has
received financial support from National Natural Science Foundation
of  China  [NSFC  72422007]  and  the  Research  Grants  Council  of  the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China [project no. HKUST
16501523]  for  the  research  described  in  this  article.  There  are  no
other conflicts of interest to disclose. Liyan Yang has received financial
support  from  Bank  of  Canada  Fellowship  and  Social  Sciences  and
Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) for the research described in this
article. There are no other conflicts of interest to disclose.

Appendix.  Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1

See the main text.

Proof of Lemma 2

If only L shares information, the two investors’ information sets are
𝐿 = { ̃𝑦} and 

𝐻 = { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦}. We conjecture that their respective trading
strategies are ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦 and ̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝑦 ̃𝑦. L’s conditional expected
profit is 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦] = ̃𝑥𝐿
. Maximizing
the expected profit yields L’s optimal trading rule ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦, where

]
̃𝑦 + 𝛼𝑦 ̃𝑦)

̃𝑦 − 𝜆( ̃𝑥𝐿 + 𝛼𝑣

[ 𝜌
1+𝜌

𝜌
1+𝜌

𝛽𝑦 =

[1 − 𝜆(𝛼𝑣 + 𝛼𝑦)]𝜌 − 𝜆𝛼𝑦
2𝜆(1 + 𝜌)

.

(A.1)

H’s conditional profit is 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐻 ( ̃𝑣− ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣] = ̃𝑥𝐻
. Maximiz-
ing the expected profit yields H’s optimal trading rule ̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝑦 ̃𝑦,
where

]
[ ̃𝑣 − 𝜆( ̃𝑥𝐻 + 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦)

𝛼𝑣 =

1
2𝜆

and 𝛼𝑦 = −

𝛽𝑦
2

.

The market maker’s pricing rule is

𝛼𝑣 + 𝛼𝑦 + 𝛽𝑦

(𝛼𝑣 + 𝛼𝑣 + 𝛽𝑦)2 + (𝛽𝑦 + 𝛼𝑦)2 1
𝜌

+ 𝜎2
𝑢

.

𝜆 =

12 

(A.2)

(A.3)

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Using Eqs. (A.1), (A.2), and (A.3) we can characterize investors’ optimal
trading rules in (7) and the pricing rule in (8). Further, inserting (7) and
(8) into the two investors’ profits and taking expectations, we obtain
the two investors’ unconditional expected profits in (9).

Proof of Lemma 3

When H shares information ̃𝑣, L will not use his endowed informa-
tion ̃𝑦 to predict the asset fundamental any more. Therefore, regardless
of L’s sharing decision, the signal ̃𝑦 is of no use to H either. The trading
game thus degenerates to the classical Kyle (1985) setting with two
perfectly informed traders, and we can easily obtain the equilibrium
outcomes as stated in Lemma 3.

Proof of Proposition 1

Based on Lemmas 1–3,

𝑔1(𝜌) ≡ 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 − 𝜋𝐻

𝐻 =

𝜎𝑢
6

(

6(2 + 𝜌)2
√

(4 + 3𝜌)

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

)
√
2

−

> 0,

1(𝜌)  =  −

(

(𝜌+2)

17𝜌2+38𝜌+24

)𝜎𝑢
2(3𝜌+4)2(2𝜌2+5𝜌+4)3∕2 < 0 and

where  the  inequality  follows 𝑔′
𝑔1(+∞) = 0. Further,
𝜎𝑢
6

𝑔2(𝜌) ≡ 𝜋𝐿

𝐻 − 𝜋𝐻

𝐻 =

√

(

9 + 4𝜌
9 + 17𝜌 + 8𝜌2

)
√
2

−

> 0,

where the inequality holds because 𝑔′
12(𝜌+1)3∕2(8𝜌+9)3∕2 < 0 and
𝑔2(+∞) = 0. Therefore, regardless of L’s sharing decision, H’s dominant
strategy is not to share information. Next, given that H does not share
information, L always wants to share information because

2(𝜌) = −

(76𝜌+81)𝜎𝑢

𝑓 (𝜌) ≡

𝜋𝐿
𝐿
𝜋𝑁
𝐿

=

√

2(4 + 3𝜌)
√
3(1 + 𝜌)

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2
(1 + 𝜌)(9 + 8𝜌)

> 1,

−

where the inequality follows because 𝑓 ′(𝜌) =
<
0 and 𝑓 (+∞) = 1. Therefore, the unique equilibrium is that L shares
information but H does not.

𝜌(2𝜌+5)+4

−𝜌(

)
50𝜌2+224𝜌+335
3(𝜌+1)5∕2(8𝜌+9)3∕2√

−164

Proof of Proposition 2

We  have  shown  that 𝜋𝐿

𝐿 >  𝜋𝑁

𝐿 in  the  proof  of Proposition  1.

According to Lemmas 1–2, we know that

(

𝐻 − 𝜋𝑁
𝜋𝐿

𝐻 =

1
6

𝜎𝑢

9 + 4𝜌
9 + 17𝜌 + 8𝜌2

√

−

6(2 + 𝜌)2
√

(4 + 3𝜌)

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

)

< 0,

where the inequality follows because
(
(

)2

√

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

−

(9 + 4𝜌)(4 + 3𝜌)
= −𝜌 (

1296 + 3044𝜌 + 2611𝜌2 + 970𝜌3 + 132𝜌4) < 0.

6(2 + 𝜌)2√

9 + 17𝜌 + 8𝜌2

)2

Further,

(𝜋𝐿

𝐿 + 𝜋𝐿

𝐻 ) − (𝜋𝑁

𝐿 + 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 ) = 𝜎𝑢

( √

9 + 8𝜌
1 + 𝜌

√

√
6

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2
4 + 3𝜌

−

)

> 0,

where the inequality follows because (9 + 8𝜌) (4 + 3𝜌)2 − 36 (1 + 𝜌) (4 +
5𝜌 + 2𝜌2)  = 𝜌 (20 + 21𝜌) > 0. This completes the proof of Part (1) of
Proposition 2.

For market liquidity,
9 + 8𝜌
1 + 𝜌

1
6𝜎𝑢

( √

√

𝜆𝐿 − 𝜆𝑁 =

√
6

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2
4 + 3𝜌

−

)

> 0,

𝐿 + 𝜋𝐿

𝐿 + 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 > 𝜋𝑁

where the inequality follows 𝜋𝐿
𝐻 . For market efficiency,
in the benchmark economy without information sharing, we compute
𝑚𝑁 = 4+3𝜌
, and in our economy with endogenous information sharing,
2+𝜌
we compute 𝑚𝐿 = 6(1+𝜌)
3+2𝜌

. A direct comparison yields 𝑚𝐿 > 𝑚𝑁 .

Finally,  we  discuss  trading  volume.  The  trading  volume  of  H  in
the  benchmark  economy  and  that  in  the  economy  with  endogenous

13 

information sharing are respectively 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁
√ 2
𝜋

, and it can be shown that
( √

𝜎𝑢
√

9+4𝜌

√

𝐻 =

√

9+8𝜌
𝐻 − 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁

𝐻 =

𝑇 𝑉 𝐿

𝜋
2

𝜎𝑢

9 + 4𝜌
9 + 8𝜌

√

−

√

2 + 𝜌
4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

)

< 0,

√ 2
𝜋

(2+𝜌)𝜎𝑢
4+5𝜌+2𝜌2

√

and 𝑇 𝑉 𝐿

𝐻 =

where  the  inequality  follows  because (9 + 4𝜌)(4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2) − (2 +
𝜌)2(9 + 8𝜌)  =  −𝜌(7 + 3𝜌) < 0. Similarly, the trading volume of L in
the  benchmark  economy  and  that  in  the  economy  with  endogenous
information sharing are respectively 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁
𝐿 =
√ 2
𝜋

𝜌(1+𝜌)𝜎𝑢
4+5𝜌+2𝜌2

and 𝑇 𝑉 𝐿

√ 2
𝜋

, and

𝐿 =

√

√

√

√

(

𝜎𝑢

2

2
𝜋

√𝜌

√

9 + 8𝜌

−

√

)

√

𝜌(1 + 𝜌)
4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

> 0,

√

2𝜌𝜎𝑢
9+8𝜌
𝐿 − 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁

𝐿 =

𝑇 𝑉 𝐿

where the inequality follows because 4𝜌(4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2) − 𝜌(1 + 𝜌)(9 + 8𝜌) =
𝜌(7 + 3𝜌) > 0.  Further,  the  trading  volume  of  the  market  maker  in
the  benchmark  economy  and  that  in  the  economy  with  endogenous
information sharing are respectively 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁
𝑀 =
√
2

(1+𝜌)(4+3𝜌)𝜎𝑢
4+5𝜌+2𝜌2
𝜋

and 𝑇 𝑉 𝐿

𝑀 = 2

√

√

√

, and

√

√

3(3+4𝜌)𝜎𝑢
9+8𝜌
𝜋
𝑀 − 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁
𝑇 𝑉 𝐿

𝑀 =

( √

3(3 + 4𝜌)
√
9 + 8𝜌

2
√
𝜋

−

√

√

4 + 7𝜌 + 3𝜌2
4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

)

< 0,

where the inequality follows because 3(3 + 4𝜌)(4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2) − (4 + 7𝜌 +
3𝜌2)(9 + 8𝜌) = −𝜌(2 + 5𝜌) < 0. Last, for total trading volume,
√

√

2√𝜌 +

6(4 + 3𝜌) +

9 + 4𝜌

𝑔3(𝜌) ≡ 𝑇 𝑉 𝐿 − 𝑇 𝑉 𝑁 =

√

𝜌(1 + 𝜌) + 2 + 𝜌 +
√
2

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

9 + 8𝜌

√
2
8 + 14𝜌 + 6𝜌2

√

.

We further show that when 𝜌 → 0, 𝑔3(𝜌) → 0 from above. And when
𝜌 → ∞, 𝑔3(𝜌) → 0 from below.

Proof of Proposition 3

As in the baseline model, we discuss the following four subgames.
Subgame 1: Both Investors Share Information. When both investors
share  their  information,  they  have  the  same  information  set: 
1 =

2 =  { ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2}, and their trading strategies are ̃𝑥1 = 𝛼1 ̃𝑦1 + 𝛼2 ̃𝑦2 and
̃𝑥2 = 𝛽1 ̃𝑦1 + 𝛽2 ̃𝑦2. For investor 1, the conditional expected profit is
𝐸[ ̃𝑥1( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2] = ̃𝑥1

− 𝜆( ̃𝑥1 + 𝛽1 ̃𝑦1 + 𝛽2 ̃𝑦2)

(A.4)

)

.

( 𝜌1 ̃𝑦1 + 𝜌2 ̃𝑦2
1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2

Maximizing the profit yields the optimal trading rule ̃𝑥1 = 𝛼1 ̃𝑦1 + 𝛼2 ̃𝑦2,
where

𝛼1 =

1
2

(

𝜌1
𝜆(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

− 𝛽1

(

)

,  𝛼2 =

1
2

𝜌2
𝜆(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

)

− 𝛽2

.

(A.5)

Similarly, investor 2’s optimal trading rule can be computed as ̃𝑥2 =
𝛽1 ̃𝑦1 + 𝛽2 ̃𝑦2, where
(

)

(

)

𝛽1 =

1
2

𝜌1
𝜆(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

− 𝛼1

,  𝛽2 =

1
2

𝜌2
𝜆(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

− 𝛼2

.

(A.6)

The market maker sets pricing rule 𝜆 =

𝛼1+𝛼2+𝛽1+𝛽2
(𝛼1+𝛼2+𝛽1+𝛽2)2+(𝛼1+𝛽1)2∕𝜌1+(𝛼2+𝛽2)2∕𝜌2+𝜎2
𝑢
Eqs. (A.5) and (A.6), we solve the market maker’s pricing rule as

. Together with

√

𝜆𝐵 =

3𝜎𝑢

2(𝜌1 + 𝜌2)
√
1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2

,

(A.7)

where  the  superscript  ‘‘B’’  denotes  the  case  in  which  both  investors
share information. Investors’ trading rules are determined accordingly:
2 = 𝛽𝐵
1 = 𝛽𝐵
𝛼𝐵

and 𝛼𝐵

(A.8)

2 =

1 =

.

𝜌1
3𝜆𝐵(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

𝜌2
3𝜆𝐵(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Inserting (A.7) and (A.8) into investor 1’s profit (A.4) and taking expec-
tation yields investor 1’s unconditional expected profit, and similarly,
we can derive investor 2’s profit as well:
√𝜌1 + 𝜌2
𝜎𝑢
2(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

1 = 𝜋𝐵
𝜋𝐵

(A.9)

√
3

2 =

.

Subgame 2: Neither Investor Shares Information. When neither investor
shares information, the two investors’ information sets are 
1 = { ̃𝑦1}
and 
2 = { ̃𝑦2}, and their trading strategies are ̃𝑥1 = 𝛼1 ̃𝑦1 and ̃𝑥2 = 𝛽2 ̃𝑦2.
Following a similar derivation as in Subgame 1, we derive the market
maker’s optimal pricing rule
(
5𝜌2

√(

)
(𝜌2 + 1

2𝜌2

𝜆𝑁 =

) 𝜌2
1 +
)
(𝜌2 + 1

2 + 5𝜌2 + 4
(
4

) 𝜌1 + 4𝜌2
)) 𝜎𝑢
and the two investors’ optimal trading rules:
)
(𝜌2 + 2
)
+ 𝜌1

2 + 8𝜌2 + 4
(
3𝜌2 + 4

𝜌1
(𝜌2 + 1

)) and 𝛽𝑁

(
3𝜌2 + 4

𝜆𝑁 (
4

𝜆𝑁 (
4

𝛼𝑁
1 =

+ 𝜌1

2 =

(𝜌1 + 2
)

) 𝜌2
(
3𝜌2 + 4
+ 𝜌1

(𝜌2 + 1

)) .

,

And the two investors’ unconditional expected trading profits are as
follows:

𝜋𝑁
1 =

𝜋𝑁
2 =

(4 + 4(𝜌1 + 𝜌2) + 3𝜌1𝜌2)

𝜌1(1 + 𝜌1)(2 + 𝜌2)2𝜎𝑢
√
(
2 + (𝜌1 + 𝜌2)
𝜌2

2𝜌2
1

(4 + 4(𝜌1 + 𝜌2) + 3𝜌1𝜌2)

𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2)(2 + 𝜌1)2𝜎𝑢
√
(
2 + (𝜌1 + 𝜌2)
𝜌2

2𝜌2
1

4 + 4(𝜌1 + 𝜌2) + 5𝜌1𝜌2

4 + 4(𝜌1 + 𝜌2) + 5𝜌1𝜌2

,

)

(A.10)

.

)

(A.11)

Subgame 3: Only Investor 1 Shares Information. Investor 1’s informa-
tion set is 
1 =  { ̃𝑦1} and trading strategy is ̃𝑥1 = 𝛼1 ̃𝑦1. Investor 2’s
information set is 
2 = { ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2} and trading strategy is ̃𝑥2 = 𝛽1 ̃𝑦1 + 𝛽2 ̃𝑦2.
Again, following the similar derivation as in previous subgames, we
compute the market maker’s optimal trading rule

𝜆𝐼 =

√

1 + 8
8𝜌2
√(𝜌1 + 1

(𝜌2 + 1
) (𝜌1 + 𝜌2 + 1

) 𝜌1 + 9𝜌2
)𝜎𝑢

6

,

where the superscript ‘‘I’’ indicates that only investor 1 shares informa-
tion. The two investors’ optimal trading rules:
)
(
2𝜌1 − 𝜌2 + 2
) (𝜌1 + 𝜌2 + 1
) ,

𝛼𝐼
1 =

1 =

𝜌1
3𝜆𝐼 (𝜌1 + 1
2 =

) ,  𝛽𝐼
𝜌2
2𝜆𝐼 (𝜌1 + 𝜌2 + 1

𝜌1
6𝜆𝐼 (𝜌1 + 1
) .

and 𝛽𝐼

And the two investors’ conditional profits are as follows:

2𝜎𝑢𝜌1

(1 + 𝜌1)(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

√

√

𝜋𝐼
1 =

3(1 + 𝜌1)

8𝜌2
(
4𝜌2

1 + 8𝜌1(1 + 𝜌2) + 9𝜌2
1 + 9𝜌2 + 4𝜌1(1 + 𝜌2)
√

) 𝜎𝑢

𝜋𝐼
2 =

√
6

(1 + 𝜌1)(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

8𝜌2

1 + 8𝜌1(1 + 𝜌2) + 9𝜌2

,

(A.12)

.

(A.13)

Subgame 4: Only Investor 2 Shares Information. Investor 1’s informa-
1 = { ̃𝑦1, ̃𝑦2} and trading strategy is ̃𝑥1 = 𝛼1 ̃𝑦1 +𝛼2 ̃𝑦2. Investor
2 =  { ̃𝑦2} and  trading  strategy  is ̃𝑥2 = 𝛽2 ̃𝑦2.

tion set is 
2’s  information  set  is 
Similarly, we can derive the market maker’s optimal trading rule:
)
(
8𝜌2 + 9
)𝜎𝑢

(𝜌2 + 1
)
8𝜌2
√(𝜌2 + 1

+ 𝜌1
) (𝜌1 + 𝜌2 + 1

𝜆𝐼 𝐼 =

√

6

,

where the superscript ‘‘II’’ indicates that only investor 2 shares infor-
mation. The two investors’ optimal trading rules:
) , 𝛼𝐼 𝐼
𝛼𝐼 𝐼
1 =

(
)
−𝜌1 + 2𝜌2 + 2
𝜌2
6𝜆𝐼 𝐼 (𝜌2 + 1

𝜌1
2𝜆𝐼 𝐼 (𝜌1 + 𝜌2 + 1

) (𝜌1 + 𝜌2 + 1

2 =

) ,

and 𝛽𝐼 𝐼

2 =

𝜌2
3𝜆𝐼 𝐼 (𝜌2 + 1

) .

The two investors’ profits are as follows:
) 𝜎𝑢

(
4𝜌2

2 + 9𝜌1 + 4𝜌2(1 + 𝜌1)
√

𝜋𝐼 𝐼
1 =

√
6

(1 + 𝜌2)(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

8𝜌2

2 + 8𝜌2(1 + 𝜌1) + 9𝜌1

𝜋𝐼 𝐼
2 =

2𝜎𝑢𝜌2

√

(1 + 𝜌2)(1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2)

√

3(1 + 𝜌2)

8𝜌2

2 + 8𝜌2(1 + 𝜌1) + 9𝜌1

.

,

(A.14)

(A.15)

We know that given that investor 2 shares information, investor 1

will not do so because
(
1 − 𝜋𝐼 𝐼
𝜋𝐵

𝜎𝑢
1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2

1 =

√
6

√

2(𝜌1 + 𝜌2) −

4𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(9 + 4𝜌2)

√

(1 + 𝜌2)

√

8𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(9 + 8𝜌2)

)

< 0,

where the inequality follows because
2(𝜌1 + 𝜌2)(1 + 𝜌2)(8𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(9 + 8𝜌2)) −
(
38𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(63 + 38𝜌2)
= −𝜌1

) < 0.

(
4𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(9 + 4𝜌2)

)2

Similarly, we know that 𝜋𝐵
2 ; that is, if investor 1 shares informa-
2
tion, investor 2 will not do so. Taken together, in equilibrium at most
one investor shares information.

< 𝜋𝐼

Furthermore,

1 − 𝜋𝑁
𝜋𝐼

1 = 𝜌1𝜎𝑢

√

1 + 𝜌1×

(

√

2
√

1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2
1 + 9𝜌2 + 8𝜌1(1 + 𝜌2)

8𝜌2

3(1 + 𝜌1)
√

1 + 𝜌1(2 + 𝜌2)2

−

)

(4(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(4 + 3𝜌2))

√

1(4 + 5𝜌2 + 2𝜌2

2) + 𝜌1(4 + 8𝜌2 + 5𝜌2
2)

4𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌2
√
1 + 𝜌1
√

𝜌1𝜎𝑢

=

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

×

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

√

×

√

×

3(1 + 𝜌1)(4(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(4 + 3𝜌2))

4𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌2
√

1(4 + 5𝜌2 + 2𝜌2

2

1 + 𝜌1 + 𝜌2(4(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌1(4 + 3𝜌2))

1 + 9𝜌2 + 8𝜌1(1 + 𝜌2)

8𝜌2
2) + 𝜌1(4 + 8𝜌2 + 5𝜌2
2)

4𝜌2(1 + 𝜌2) + 𝜌2
+3(1 + 𝜌1)3∕2(2 + 𝜌2)2

1(4 + 5𝜌2 + 2𝜌2
√

8𝜌2

2) + 𝜌1(4 + 8𝜌2 + 5𝜌2
2)

1 + 9𝜌2 + 8𝜌1(1 + 𝜌2)
2 + 400𝜌2 + 224

2 + 244𝜌2

) 𝜌4

1

(

(
51𝜌3
2
2 + 748𝜌3
75𝜌4
+
(
2 + 1852𝜌3
293𝜌4
(
2 + 1928𝜌3
389𝜌4
175𝜌3
+𝜌2

(

2 + 2296𝜌2
2 + 4144𝜌2
2 + 3380𝜌2
2 + 726𝜌2

+
+

2 + 2912𝜌2 + 1344
2 + 3944𝜌2 + 1344
2 + 2352𝜌2 + 448

2 + 1044𝜌2 + 520

)

)
(𝜌2 − 2(1 + 𝜌1)

×

×

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

1

1

,

) 𝜌3
) 𝜌2
) 𝜌1

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
2 − 𝜋𝑁

which  is  positively  related  to 𝜌2 − 2(1 + 𝜌1).  Similarly, 𝜋𝐼 𝐼
is
positively related to 𝜌1 − 2(1 + 𝜌2). Overall, we obtain the following
equilibrium results:

2

(1) If 𝜌2

≥ 2(1 + 𝜌1), the unique equilibrium is that only investor 1

shares information;

(2) If 𝜌1

≥ 2(1 + 𝜌2), the unique equilibrium is that only investor 2

shares information;

(3) Otherwise, the unique equilibrium is that neither investor shares

their information.

Proof of Proposition 4

We first prove Part (1) of this proposition. Upon the realizations
of H’s and L’s private signals: 𝑣 = ̃𝑣 and 𝑦 = ̃𝑦, suppose that neither
investor shares information. Following the proof of Lemma 1, we can
show the two investors’ conditional expected trading profits as follows:

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑁

𝐿 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦] =

𝜌2𝜎𝑢
√
4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

(4 + 3𝜌)

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑁

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] =

14 

(2 + 𝜌)2𝜎𝑢

√

(4 + 3𝜌)

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

𝑦2,

𝑣2.

I. Goldstein et al.

𝑦2.

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐼

1 + 𝜌
9 + 8𝜌

𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦] =

Now suppose that L deviates and shares his observation of 𝑦. Then (i)
H updates his belief and trades accordingly, and (ii) the market maker
knows that L shares information (but not the specific realization) and
adjusts the pricing rule accordingly. L’s profit thus becomes
√
2𝜌2𝜎𝑢
3(1 + 𝜌)2√
𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦] > 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑁

Since 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐼
𝐿 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦] for any realization of ̃𝑦, L
always has the incentive to deviate from the conjectured equilibrium.
For Part (2) of the proposition, suppose that upon observing the
realization of his private signal, H shares it. Then following the proof
of Lemma  3,  regardless  of  L’s  sharing  decision,  we  can  show  H’s
conditional expected trading profits as follows:
𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐵

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] = 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐻

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] =

𝑣2.

𝜎𝑢
√
2
3

Now we study H’s deviation in the following two cases. First, consider
that  in  the  conjectured  equilibrium  L  does  not  share  information.
Since  after  H’s  deviation,  neither  the  market  maker  nor  L  updates
beliefs about the distribution of H’s private signal, we can compute H’s
conditional expected trading profits after deviation as follows:
(2 + 𝜌)2𝜎𝑢

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑁

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] =

√

(4 + 3𝜌)

4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

𝑣2.

Since 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑁
H has the incentive to deviate if L does not share information.

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] for any realization of ̃𝑣,

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] > 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐻

Second, consider that L also shares information in the conjectured
equilibrium. Again, since after H’s deviation, neither the market maker
nor L updates beliefs about the distribution of H’s private signal, we
compute H’s conditional expected profit after deviation as follows:

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] =

(𝜌 + (3 + 2𝜌)2𝑣2)𝜎𝑢
6(1 + 𝜌)2√

9 + 8𝜌

√

1 + 𝜌

.

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣]  = 𝜎𝑢

6

(

𝜌

(1+𝜌)3∕2√

9+8𝜌

+

Since 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿
(

(3+2𝜌)2
(1+𝜌)3∕2√

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] − 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐵
)
2

𝑣2

√

)

−

9+8𝜌

> 0 for  any  realization  of

̃𝑣,  H  always
has incentives to deviate and not share information. Taken together,
regardless of L’s sharing decision, H always has incentives to deviate.
So the conjectured equilibrium involving H sharing information cannot
be sustained.

We finally prove Part (3) of this proposition in the following two
steps.  Suppose  that  upon  observing  the  realization  of  their  private
signals, L shares information whereas H does not. Then following the
proof of Lemma 2, the two investors’ conditional expected profits can
be computed as follows:

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿

𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦] =

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] =

𝑦2,

√
1 + 𝜌
2𝜌2𝜎𝑢
3(1 + 𝜌)2√
9 + 8𝜌
(𝜌 + (3 + 2𝜌)2𝑣2)𝜎𝑢
6(1 + 𝜌)2√

9 + 8𝜌

First, given that L shares information, we show that H will not deviate
from the no-sharing decision for any given realization of ̃𝑣. Suppose not
and H deviates and shares his observation of 𝑣. Then (i) L updates his
belief about the asset fundamental and trades on the shared informa-
tion accordingly, and (ii) the market maker knows that H shares his
information. H’s profits then become:
𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐵

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] =

𝑣2.

𝜎𝑢
√
2
3

𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] > 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐵

As shown in the second case in the proof of Part (2) of this proposition,
since 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿
𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣 = 𝑣] for any realization of ̃𝑣, H
will not deviate from his no-sharing strategy. Second, given that H does
not share his information, we will show that L will not deviate from
sharing information for any realization of ̃𝑦. Suppose not and L deviates
and chooses not to share his information. Then, (i) H holds passive

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

beliefs along this off-equilibrium path, i.e., believing that L’s private
information ̃𝑦 still follows the original distribution; and (ii) the market
maker observes that L does not share his information but instead holds
passive beliefs (not updating beliefs about the distribution of L’s private
signal), so L’s profits become

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑁

𝐿 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦] =

𝜌2𝜎𝑢
√
4 + 5𝜌 + 2𝜌2

(4 + 3𝜌)

𝑦2.

We can show that for any ̃𝑦, 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑁
𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦], so
L will not deviate from sharing information. Taken together, it can be
sustained as an equilibrium that L shares information whereas H never
shares regardless of the realizations of their private signals.

𝐿 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦 = 𝑦] < 𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿

Proof of Proposition 5

To prepare the proof, we first examine the trading equilibrium in
which Hs do not share their information and L shares his information.
We will later confirm that this is indeed the equilibrium. In this way,
we focus on Hs’ reading behavior.

Assume that among the H investors, 𝑀1 of them choose to listen
to  the  information  shared  by  investor  L.  We  consider  the  following
symmetric  linear  trading  equilibrium:  the  H  investor  who  uses  the
̃𝑦 units of the risky asset,
shared information trades ̃𝑥𝑖 = 𝛼𝑣1
where 𝑖 ∈  {1, … , 𝑀1};  the  H  investor  who  commits  not  to  use  the
shared information trades ̃𝑥𝑘 = 𝛼𝑣2
̃𝑣 units of the risky asset, where
𝑘 ∈  {𝑀1 + 1, … , 𝑀}; L trades ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽 ̃𝑦 units of the risky asset; and
the market paper sets a linear pricing rule, ̃𝑝 = 𝜆 ̃𝜔.

̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿1

Consider H investor 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑀1} who uses the shared informa-
tion. With the information set { ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦}, his conditional expected profit is
as follows:

(

(

̃𝑣 − 𝜆

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑖( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑦] = ̃𝑥𝑖
̃𝑣 + 𝛽 ̃𝑦
Maximizing profits yields the investor’s optimal trading rule ̃𝑥𝑖 = 𝛼𝑣𝑖
𝛼𝐿𝑖

̃𝑦) + (𝑀 − 𝑀1)𝛼𝑣2

̃𝑥𝑖 + (𝑀1 − 1)(𝛼𝑣1

̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿1

̃𝑦 with

))

.

̃𝑣 +

𝛼𝑣𝑖 =

(

1
2𝜆

1 − (𝑀1 − 1)𝜆𝛼𝑣1

− (𝑀 − 𝑀1)𝜆𝛼𝑣2

)

and 𝛼𝐿𝑖 = −

(
(𝑀1 − 1)𝛼𝐿1

)

.

+ 𝛽

1
2

(A.16)

( ̃𝑣 − 𝜆 ( ̃𝑥𝑘 + 𝑀1(𝛼𝑣1

For H investor 𝑘 ∈ {𝑀1 + 1, … , 𝑀} who commits not to use the shared
information,  with  the  information  set { ̃𝑣},  his  conditional  expected
profit is as follows:
𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝑘( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣] = ̃𝑥𝑘
Maximizing the profit yields the investor’s optimal trading rule ̃𝑥𝑘 =
𝛼𝑣𝑘
𝛼𝑣𝑘
For investor L, his conditional expected trading profits are as follows:

̃𝑣 with
(
1
1 − 𝛽 𝜆 − 𝑀1𝜆(𝛼𝐿1
2𝜆

) − (𝑀 − 𝑀1 − 1)𝜆𝛼𝑣2

̃𝑣) + (𝑀 − 𝑀1 − 1)𝛼𝑣2

̃𝑣 + 𝛽 ̃𝑣)) .

̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿1

+ 𝛼𝑣1

(A.17)

=

)

.

Maximizing investor 𝐿’s profits yields the optimal trading strategy ̃𝑥𝐿 =
𝛽 ̃𝑦, with
𝑀1
2

(
1 − 𝑀1𝜆𝛼𝑣1

− (𝑀 − 𝑀1)𝜆𝛼𝑣2

𝜌
2𝜆(1 + 𝜌)

𝛽 = −

(A.18)

𝛼𝐿1

+

)

.

Imposing symmetric equilibrium 𝛼𝑣𝑖
, the
interaction of the reaction functions (A.16)–(A.18) yields the optimal
trading strategies as specified below:

, and 𝛼𝑣𝑘

= 𝛼𝐿1

= 𝛼𝑣1

= 𝛼𝑣2

, 𝛼𝐿𝑖

𝛼𝑣1

𝛼𝐿1

=

𝜆 (
= −

(2 + 𝑀1)(1 + 𝜌)
(1 + 𝑀)(2 + 𝑀1) + (2 + 𝑀)(1 + 𝑀1)𝜌) ,
(1 + 𝑀)(2 + 𝑀1) + (2 + 𝑀)(1 + 𝑀1)𝜌) ,
𝜆 (
2 + 𝑀1 + 𝜌 + 𝑀1𝜌
(1 + 𝑀)(2 + 𝑀1) + (2 + 𝑀)(1 + 𝑀1)𝜌) ,

𝜌

𝜆 (

𝛼𝑣2

=

15 

(A.19)

(A.20)

(A.21)

√

1 + 𝜌

.

𝐸[ ̃𝑥𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦] = ̃𝑥𝐿

( 𝜌

(

(

̃𝑦 − 𝜆

̃𝑥𝐿 + 𝑀1

𝛼𝑣1

𝜌
1 + 𝜌

̃𝑦 + 𝛼𝐿1

̃𝑦

)

+ (𝑀 − 𝑀1)𝛼𝑣2

𝜌
1 + 𝜌

̃𝑦

1 + 𝜌

))

.

I. Goldstein et al.

𝛽 =

(1 + 𝑀1)𝜌
(1 + 𝑀)(2 + 𝑀1) + (2 + 𝑀)(1 + 𝑀1)𝜌) .

𝜆 (

(A.22)

We then prove that in this equilibrium Hs’ profits would be higher had
they all committed not to use the shared information.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Using the weak efficiency rule, the market maker’s optimal pricing rule
is as follows:

𝜆 =

(𝑀1(𝛼𝑣1

𝑀1(𝛼𝑣1
+ 𝛼𝐿1
) + (𝑀 − 𝑀1)𝛼𝑣2

) + (𝑀 − 𝑀1)𝛼𝑣2

+ 𝛽
+ 𝛽)2 + (𝑀1𝛼𝐿1

+ 𝛼𝐿1

+ 𝛽)2∕𝜌 + 𝜎2
𝑢

.

Inserting the optimal trading strategies into 𝜆 we can derive the equi-
librium pricing rule ̃𝑝 = 𝜆 ̃𝜔 with

𝜆 =

√

𝑀(2 + 𝑀1 + 𝜌 + 𝑀1𝜌)2 + 𝜌 + 𝜌2 + 𝑀1𝜌(3 + 𝑀1 + (2 + 𝑀1)𝜌)
(1 + 𝑀)(2 + 𝑀1) + (2 + 𝑀)(1 + 𝑀1)𝜌) 𝜎𝑢
(

.

(A.23)

Now,  inserting  the  optimal  trading  rules (A.19)–(A.22) and  the  op-
timal pricing rule (A.23) into the investors’ expected trading profits
and taking expectations yields their respective unconditional profits as
follows:
𝜋𝑖(𝑀1, 𝑀) = (𝜌 + 1)
𝜋𝑘(𝑀1, 𝑀) = (𝑀1𝜌 + 𝑀1 + 𝜌 + 2)2𝜎𝑢𝛤 −1,
𝜋𝐿(𝑀1, 𝑀) = (𝑀1 + 1)2𝜌(𝜌 + 1)𝜎𝑢𝛤 −1,

1 (𝜌 + 1) + 2𝑀1(𝜌 + 2) + 𝜌 + 4

) 𝜎𝑢𝛤 −1,

(𝑀 2

(A.25)

(A.24)

(A.26)

where
𝛤 = ((𝑀 + 2)(𝑀1 + 1)𝜌 + (𝑀 + 1)(𝑀1 + 2))
√

×

𝑀(𝑀1𝜌 + 𝑀1 + 𝜌 + 2)2 + 𝜌(𝑀1((𝑀1 + 2)𝜌 + 𝑀1 + 3) + 𝜌 + 1).

Proof of Part (1). We discuss if 𝑀1 =  0 (that all Hs commit not to
use L’s shared information) is an equilibrium. When 𝑀1 = 0, based on
Eqs. (A.25), the profits of Hs are as follows:

𝜋𝑘(0, 𝑀) =

(2 + 2𝜌 + 𝑀(2 + 𝜌))

𝑀(3 + 2𝜌)2 + 𝜌(5 + 4𝜌)

(2 + 𝜌)2𝜎𝑢
√

.

(A.27)

If  one  H  deviates  and  uses  the  shared  information,  according  to
Eq. (A.24), his profits will become

𝜋𝑖(1, 𝑀) =

(1 + 𝜌)(9 + 4𝜌)𝜎𝑢
√

(3 + 4𝜌 + 𝑀(3 + 2𝜌))

𝑀(3 + 2𝜌)2 + 𝜌(5 + 4𝜌)

.

Therefore, 𝑀1 =  0 is not an equilibrium if
know that

𝜋𝑖(1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑘(0,𝑀)

> 1. Further, we

𝜕
𝜕 𝑀

)

( 𝜋𝑖(1, 𝑀)
𝜋𝑘(0, 𝑀)

=

𝜌𝜋𝑖(1, 𝑀)
𝜋𝑘(0, 𝑀)

(

𝑀 2 (
+𝑀 (

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
2(𝑀(𝜌 + 2) + 2(𝜌 + 1))

)
18𝜌4 + 121𝜌3 + 303𝜌2 + 335𝜌 + 138
⎞
)
⎟
56𝜌4 + 299𝜌3 + 577𝜌2 + 469𝜌 + 132
⎟
)
⎟
24𝜌2 + 56𝜌 + 33
⎠
) > 0
)
(𝑀(𝜌 + 2)2 + 𝜌(𝜌 + 1)
)
(𝑀(2𝜌 + 3)2 + 𝜌(4𝜌 + 5)

+2(𝜌 + 1)2 (

×(𝑀(2𝜌 + 3) + 4𝜌 + 3)

and when 𝑀 = 4,
𝜋𝑖(1, 4)
𝜋𝑘(0, 4)

=

2(𝜌 + 1)(3𝜌 + 5)(4𝜌 + 9)
3(𝜌 + 2)2(4𝜌 + 5)

√

√

5𝜌2 + 17𝜌 + 16

20𝜌2 + 53𝜌 + 36

> 1,

where the inequality holds because
(
)2

√

2(𝜌 + 1)(3𝜌 + 5)(4𝜌 + 9)
= 𝜌 (

5𝜌2 + 17𝜌 + 16

(
3(𝜌 + 2)2(4𝜌 + 5)

√

−

240𝜌6 + 2744𝜌5 + 13071𝜌4 + 33004𝜌3 + 46336𝜌2 + 34132𝜌 + 10260

)2

20𝜌2 + 53𝜌 + 36
) > 0.

Therefore, if 𝑀 > 3, we must have
be sustained in equilibrium.

𝜋𝑖(1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑘(0,𝑀)

> 1; that is, 𝑀1 = 0 cannot

Proof of Part (2). To prove Part (2) of the proposition, we first char-
acterize the condition under which that L shares information and all
H-investors use the shared information can be sustained in equilibrium.

16 

First, we discuss when 𝑀1 = 𝑀 (that all Hs use L’s shared informa-
tion) can be an equilibrium. When 𝑀1 = 𝑀, based on Eq. (A.24), the
profits of Hs are as follows:
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 , 𝑀)

=

(𝑀 2 + 3𝑀 + 2

) √

) 𝜎𝑢
(𝑀 2(𝜌 + 1) + 2𝑀(𝜌 + 2) + 𝜌 + 4
)
𝜌 (𝑀 2(𝜌 + 1) + 𝑀(2𝜌 + 3) + 𝜌 + 1
+ 𝑀(𝑀 𝜌 + 𝑀 + 𝜌 + 2)2

.

(A.28)

If  one  H  deviates  and  chooses  not  to  use  the  shared  information,
according to Eq. (A.25), his profits become
𝜋𝑘(𝑀 − 1, 𝑀)

=

(𝑀 2(𝜌 + 1) + 2𝑀(𝜌 + 1) + 1

(𝑀 𝜌 + 𝑀 + 1)2𝜎𝑢
)
𝑀 3(𝜌 + 1)2 + 𝑀 2 (𝜌2 + 3𝜌 + 2

) √

.

+ 𝑀(𝜌 + 1) − 𝜌

𝜋𝑘(𝑀−1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

< 1. Further, we can

)

𝜕
𝜕 𝑀

Therefore, 𝑀1 = 𝑀 is an equilibrium if
express

( 𝜋𝑘(𝑀−1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)
𝜕
So, lim𝑀→∞
𝜕 𝑀
We further know that lim𝑀→∞

( 𝜋𝑘(𝑀−1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

)

𝜋𝑘(𝑀−1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

as indicated in Box I.

> 0 and lim𝑀→1

( 𝜋𝑘(𝑀−1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

𝜕
𝜕 𝑀
= 1 and lim𝑀→1

)

< 0.

𝜋𝑘(𝑀−1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

=

> 1. Thus, there must exist

̂𝑀1 > 0 such that when
< 1; that is, 𝑀1 = 𝑀 can be sustained as an

6(𝜌+2)2√
8𝜌2+17𝜌+9
√
(3𝜌+4)(4𝜌+9)
𝑀  > ̂𝑀1,
equilibrium.

2𝜌2+5𝜌+4
𝜋𝑘(𝑀−1,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

Finally, to sustain the conjectured equilibrium, we need to make
sure  that  (i)  L  will  not  deviate  to  not  sharing  information,  and  (ii)
none  of  the  H  investors  will  deviate  to  sharing  information.  In  the
conjectured equilibrium, setting 𝑀1 = 𝑀 yields L’s expected profits
as follows:

𝜋𝐿 =

√

(𝑀 + 2)

𝜌 (𝑀 2(𝜌 + 1) + 𝑀(2𝜌 + 3) + 𝜌 + 1

)

+ 𝑀(𝑀 𝜌 + 𝑀 + 𝜌 + 2)2

.

(𝑀 + 1)𝜌𝜎𝑢

Following the similar derivation we did at the beginning of the proof,
we can derive that if L deviates and chooses not to share information,
his unconditional expected profit becomes

𝜋deviate
𝐿

=

𝜌(𝜌 + 1)𝜎𝑢
√

(𝑀(𝜌 + 2) + 2(𝜌 + 1))

𝑀(𝜌 + 2)2 + 𝜌(𝜌 + 1)

.

𝜋𝐿
𝜋𝑑 𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑒

𝐿

Define 𝑓1(𝑀) ≡
2(3𝜌+4)
√

2𝜌2+5𝜌+4
8𝜌2+17𝜌+9

√

3(𝜌+1)
that is, L will not deviate.

.  We  show  that 𝑓 ′

1(𝑀) > 0 and 𝑓1(1)  =
always holds;

> 1. Therefore, for 𝑀 ≥ 1, 𝜋𝐿 > 𝜋deviate

𝐿

In the conjectured equilibrium, one H’s expected profit is 𝜋𝑖(𝑀 , 𝑀)
as shown in (A.28). If, instead, he deviates and shares his information
with L, then all 𝑀 + 1 investors know the asset fundamental ̃𝑣, and H’s
profit from deviation becomes 𝜋deviate
. Define 𝑓2(𝑀) =
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)
2(𝑀) < 0 and lim𝑀→∞ 𝑓2(𝑀) = 1, so 𝑓2(𝑀) > 1.
𝜋deviate
𝐻
Thus, for all 𝑀 ≥ 1, 𝜋𝑖(𝑀 , 𝑀) > 𝜋deviate
; that is, H will not deviate.
Overall, L shares information, and none of Hs shares information but
all Hs use the shared information can be sustained in equilibrium.

. We show that 𝑓 ′

𝜎𝑢
√
(𝑀+2)

𝑀+1

=

𝐻

𝐻

Last, we show that while 𝑀1 = 𝑀 can be sustained as an equilib-
rium when 𝑀 > ̂𝑀1, it is always dominated by 𝑀1 = 0 in terms of H’s
profit. That is, Hs would have been better off had they all committed
not to use the shared information. An H investor’s profit when no Hs
use L’s shared information 𝜋𝑘(0, 𝑀) and when all Hs use the shared
information 𝜋𝑖(𝑀 , 𝑀) are given, respectively, by (A.27) and (A.28). We
as indicated in Box II. So, there exists a constant
can express
̂𝑀2 > 0 such that when 𝑀 > ̂𝑀2,
< 0. Further, as 𝑀 → +∞,

𝜋𝑘(0,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

𝜕
𝜕 𝑀

𝜕
𝜕 𝑀

𝜋𝑘(0,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

I. Goldstein et al.

𝜕
𝜕 𝑀

( 𝜋𝑘(𝑀 − 1, 𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 , 𝑀)

)

=

𝜌𝜋𝑘(𝑀 − 1, 𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 , 𝑀)

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

×

−𝑀 5 (

−𝑀 3 (

−𝑀 7(𝜌 + 1)2 (

4𝑀 10(𝜌 + 1)4 + 𝑀 9(𝜌 + 1)3(23𝜌 + 31) + 𝑀 8(𝜌 + 1)2 (
)
97𝜌2 + 244𝜌 + 143
)
624𝜌4 + 3715𝜌3 + 7907𝜌2 + 7213𝜌 + 2397

− 𝑀 6 (
− 𝑀 4 (
)
258𝜌4 + 1966𝜌3 + 5321𝜌2 + 6128𝜌 + 2551

)
29𝜌2 + 89𝜌 + 64
⎞
)
⎟
397𝜌4 + 2092𝜌3 + 4005𝜌2 + 3326𝜌 + 1016
⎟
)
⎟
532𝜌4 + 3590𝜌3 + 8551𝜌2 + 8651𝜌 + 3166
⎟
)
⎟
68𝜌4 + 562𝜌3 + 1785𝜌2 + 2484𝜌 + 1246
⎟
)
(
)
⎟
3𝜌2 + 25𝜌 + 20
8𝜌4 + 62𝜌3 + 260𝜌2 + 523𝜌 + 340
− 2
⎠
)
(𝑀 2(𝜌 + 1) + 2𝑀(𝜌 + 2) + 𝜌 + 4
⎞
(𝑀 3(𝜌 + 1) + 𝑀 2(3𝜌 + 4) + 𝑀(3𝜌 + 4) + 𝜌)
⎟
⎟
+ 𝑀(𝜌 + 1) − 𝜌)
⎟
⎠

−𝑀 (
(𝑀 𝜌 + 𝑀 + 1) ×

)
(𝑀 3(𝜌 + 1)2 + 𝑀 2 (𝜌2 + 3𝜌 + 2

)
(𝑀 2 + 3𝑀 + 2

2

− 𝑀 2 (

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

×

×

.

𝜕
𝜕 𝑀

𝜋𝑘(0, 𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 , 𝑀)

= 𝜌(𝜌 + 2)2

Box I.

−𝑀 7(𝜌 + 1)2 (

)
4𝜌2 + 15𝜌 + 14
−𝑀 5 (
)
33𝜌4 + 165𝜌3 + 314𝜌2 + 268𝜌 + 86
)
181𝜌4 + 805𝜌3 + 1372𝜌2 + 1060𝜌 + 312

+𝑀 3 (

+ 𝑀 2 (

− 𝑀 6 (
+ 𝑀 4 (

)
22𝜌4 + 119𝜌3 + 242𝜌2 + 217𝜌 + 72
⎞
)
⎟
37𝜌4 + 185𝜌3 + 368𝜌2 + 336𝜌 + 116
⎟
)
⎟
237𝜌4 + 949𝜌3 + 1380𝜌2 + 844𝜌 + 176
⎟
⎟
+ 32𝜌(𝜌 + 1)3
⎠
)2

)
70𝜌3 + 247𝜌2 + 293𝜌 + 116

.

+2𝑀 𝜌 (

2(𝑀(𝜌 + 2) + 2(𝜌 + 1))2 (𝑀 2(𝜌 + 1) + 2𝑀(𝜌 + 2) + 𝜌 + 4
(𝑀(𝜌 + 2)2 + 𝜌(𝜌 + 1)

+ 𝑀(𝑀 𝜌 + 𝑀 + 𝜌 + 2)2 ×

)3∕2

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

)
𝜌 (𝑀 2(𝜌 + 1) + 𝑀(2𝜌 + 3) + 𝜌 + 1

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

×

⎛
⎜
⎜
×
⎝

√

𝜋𝑘(0,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)
𝜋𝑘(0, 2)
𝜋𝑖(2, 2)

→ 1. When 𝑀 = 2,
6(𝜌 + 2)2√
(2𝜌 + 3)(9𝜌 + 16)

=

27𝜌2 + 59𝜌 + 32

√

3𝜌2 + 9𝜌 + 8

> 1,

where the inequality holds because
(
6(𝜌 + 2)2√
𝜌 (
612𝜌4 + 4137𝜌3 + 10431𝜌2 + 11608𝜌 + 4800

(2𝜌 + 3)(9𝜌 + 16)
) > 0.

27𝜌2 + 59𝜌 + 32

)2

−

(

√

3𝜌2 + 9𝜌 + 8

)2

Box II.

=

Therefore, when 𝑀 > ̂𝑀2,
> 1; that is, the H investors would be
better off had all of them committed not to use the shared information.
Overall, when 𝑀  > ̂𝑀 ≡ max{ ̂𝑀1,
̂𝑀2}, Part (2) of the proposition
holds.

𝜋𝑘(0,𝑀)
𝜋𝑖(𝑀 ,𝑀)

Proof of Proposition 6

In this extended economy, we are interested in examining if L still
shares information once the shared information can be observed by the
market maker, but the market maker and H have different capabilities
in interpreting the information. Specifically, if L shares information ̃𝑦,
H and the market maker will respectively observe
̃𝑞𝐻 = ̃𝑦 + ̃𝜁𝐻 and ̃𝑞𝑀 = ̃𝑦 + ̃𝜁𝑀 ,

whereas if H shares his information ̃𝑣, L and the market maker will
respectively observe
̃𝑞𝐿 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝜉𝐿 and ̃𝑞′

𝑀 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝜉𝑀 ,

𝐻 ) and ̃𝜉𝑀 , ̃𝜁𝑀 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜒 −1

with ̃𝜉𝐿, ̃𝜁𝐻 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜒 −1
𝑀 ). The random variables
{ ̃𝑣, ̃𝑒, ̃𝜁𝐻 , ̃𝜁𝑀 , ̃𝜉𝐿, ̃𝜉𝑀 } are  mutually  independent.  We  then  follow  the
baseline model to first consider the date-1 subgame equilibrium and
then determine the equilibrium information-sharing strategy.

Subgame  1:  Neither  Investor  Shares  Information (𝐴𝐿 = 𝐴𝐻 =  ∅).
The subgame becomes the no-information-sharing benchmark studied
in Lemma 1, in which the two investors’ unconditional trading profits
are given by 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 and 𝜋𝑁
𝐿 .

Subgame  2:  L  Shares  Information  and  H  Does  Not (𝐴𝐿 = 𝑆 and
𝐴𝐻 = ∅). Investor H receives signal ̃𝑞𝐻 = ̃𝑦 + ̃𝜁𝐻 and we conjecture
his linear trading strategy to be ̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿 ̃𝑞𝐻 . L’s trading strategy
is ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦. In addition to the total order flow ̃𝜔, the market maker
observes ̃𝑞𝑀 = ̃𝑦 + ̃𝜁𝑀 and adopts a linear pricing rule ̃𝑝 = 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔 + 𝜆𝐿 ̃𝑞𝑀 .
Note that L could not observe ̃𝑞𝐻 or ̃𝑞𝑀 because the noise terms ̃𝜁𝐻 and
̃𝜁𝑀 are receiver noises.

For investor H, his conditional trading profit on 𝑡 = 1 is:
(

(

)

𝐸 [ ̃𝑥𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑞𝐻

]

= ̃𝑥𝐻

̃𝑣 − 𝜆𝜔

̃𝑥𝐻 + 𝛽𝑦

𝜌 ̃𝑣 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐻
𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

− 𝜆𝐿

𝜌 ̃𝑣 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐻
𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

)

,

(A.29)

)

−𝜆𝐿

𝛼𝑣 =

Maximizing the profit yields investor H’s optimal trading rule: ̃𝑥𝐻 =
𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿 ̃𝑞𝐻 with
𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌 (
2𝜆𝑤
(𝜆𝐿 + 𝜆𝑤𝛽𝑦
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌) .

(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌)
)

𝜒𝐻
2𝜆𝑤

+ 𝜌 − 𝜌𝜆𝑤𝛽𝑦

𝛼𝐿 = −

(A.31)

(A.30)

,

Similarly, L’s conditional trading profit is
( 𝜌

(

𝐸 [ ̃𝑥𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦]

= ̃𝑥𝐿

̃𝑦 − 𝜆𝜔

̃𝑥𝐿 + 𝛼𝑣

1 + 𝜌

𝜌
1 + 𝜌

)

)

̃𝑦 + 𝛼𝐿 ̃𝑦

− 𝜆𝐿 ̃𝑦

,

(A.32)

Maximizing the profit yields investor L’s optimal trading rule ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦
with

𝜌 (

1 − 𝛼𝑣𝜆𝑤

)

(𝜆𝐿 + 𝛼𝐿𝜆𝑤

)

− (𝜌 + 1)
2(𝜌 + 1)𝜆𝑤

.

(A.33)

𝛽𝑦 =

17 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

The market maker’s pricing rule is ̃𝑝 = 𝐸[ ̃𝑣| ̃𝜔, ̃𝑞𝑀 ] = 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔 + 𝜆𝐿 ̃𝑞𝑀 ,

with 𝜆𝜔 and 𝜆𝐿 computed as follows:
𝜆𝜔 = 𝜒𝐻

(𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌)

+ 𝜌𝛽𝑦

(𝜌𝛼𝐿 + 𝛼𝑣
(
−𝜒𝐻 𝛼𝐿𝛼𝑣 + 𝜒𝐻

) 𝛤 −1,
)

(𝜌𝜎2

𝑢 − 𝛼𝑣𝛽𝑦

+ 𝜌𝛼2
𝐿

) 𝛤 −1,

(A.34)

(A.35)

𝜆𝐿 = 𝜒𝑀

where

𝛤 = 𝛼2
𝐿
(
𝜎2
𝑢

+𝜒𝐻

(𝜌 + 1)𝜒𝐻 + (𝜌 + 1)𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌)
(
(𝜌 + 1)𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌)
(

+ 𝛼2
𝑣

(𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌)

(𝜌𝛼𝑣 + (𝜌 + 1)𝛽𝑦
)
+ 2𝜌𝛼𝑣𝛽𝑦 + (𝜌 + 1)𝛽2
𝑦

)

.

+ 2𝜒𝐻 𝛼𝐿

Based on Eqs. (A.30), (A.31), (A.33), (A.34), and (A.35), we are
able  to  compute  optimal  trading  rules {𝛼𝑣, 𝛼𝐿, 𝛽𝑦} and  the  optimal
pricing rule {𝜆𝜔, 𝜆𝐿}. We then insert them into the two investors’ profit
functions (A.29) and (A.32) to compute their respective unconditional
trading profits 𝜋𝐿

𝐻 and 𝜋𝐿
𝐿 .

Subgame  3:  H  Shares  Information  and  L  Does  Not (𝐴𝐿 =  ∅ and
𝐴𝐻 = 𝑆). Investor L receives signal ̃𝑞𝐿 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝜉𝐿 and we conjecture
his linear trading strategy to be ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦 + 𝛽𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿. H’s trading strategy
is ̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣. In addition to the total order flow ̃𝜔, the market maker
observes ̃𝑞′
𝑀 .

𝑀 = ̃𝑣 + ̃𝜉𝑀 and adopts a linear pricing rule ̃𝑝 = 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔 + 𝜆𝐻 ̃𝑞′

For investor L, his conditional trading profit on 𝑡 = 1 is

𝐸 [ ̃𝑥𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦, ̃𝑞𝐿

]

= ̃𝑥𝐿

( 𝜌 ̃𝑦 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿
1 + 𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

(

− 𝜆𝜔

̃𝑥𝐿 + 𝛼𝑣

𝜌 ̃𝑦 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿
1 + 𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

)

− 𝜆𝐻

𝜌 ̃𝑦 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿
1 + 𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

)

,

Maximizing the profit yields investor L’s optimal trading strategy ̃𝑥𝐿 =
𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦 + 𝛽𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿 with

𝛽𝑦 =

𝛽𝐻 = −

(

𝜌(1 − 𝜆𝐻 − 𝛼𝑣𝜆𝑤)
1 + 𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌) ,
2𝜆𝑤
𝜒𝐻 (1 − 𝜆𝐻 − 𝛼𝑣𝜆𝑤)
1 + 𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌) .
2𝜆𝑤

(

Similarly, investor H’s conditional trading profit on 𝑡 = 1 is

𝐸 [ ̃𝑥𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣]

= ̃𝑥𝐻

( ̃𝑣 − 𝜆𝜔

( ̃𝑥𝐻 + 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑣 + 𝛽𝐻 ̃𝑣)

− 𝜆𝐻 ̃𝑣) ,

Maximizing the profit yields investor H’s optimal trading strategy: ̃𝑥𝐻 =
𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣 with

𝛼𝑣 =

1 − 𝜆𝐻 + 𝜆𝑤(𝛽𝐻 + 𝛽𝑦)
2𝜆𝑤

.

The market maker’s pricing rule is ̃𝑝 = 𝐸[ ̃𝑣| ̃𝜔, ̃𝑞′
𝜆𝜔 = 𝜒𝐻 𝜌 (𝛼𝑣 + 𝛽𝑦 + 𝛽𝐻
(
𝐻 + 𝜒𝐻 (𝛽2
𝜌𝛽2
𝜆𝐻 = 𝜒𝑀

)
𝑦 + 𝜌𝜎2
𝑢 )

) 𝛤 −1,

𝛤 −1,

𝑀 ] = 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔 + 𝜆𝐻 ̃𝑞′

𝑀 , with

where

𝛤 = 𝜌𝛽2
𝐻
+ 𝛽2
𝑦

)
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜒𝑀 + 1
)
(𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌 + 1

(𝛼𝑣 + 𝛽𝑦
+ +2𝜌𝛽𝐻 𝜒𝐻
)
𝑣 + 2𝜌𝛼𝑣𝛽𝑦
.

+ 𝜌𝛼2

)

+ 𝜒𝐻

(𝜌 (𝜒𝑀 + 1

) 𝜎2
𝑢

As  in  Subgame  1,  we  can  compute  the  optimal  trading  strategies
{𝛽𝑦, 𝛽𝐻 , 𝛼𝑣}, the optimal pricing rule {𝜆𝑤, 𝜆𝐻 }, and the two investors’
𝐻 and 𝜋𝐻
unconditional trading profits 𝜋𝐻
𝐿 .
Subgame 4: Both Investors Share Information (𝐴𝐿 = 𝐴𝐻 = 𝑆). We
conjecture the two investors’ trading strategies to be ̃𝑥𝐻 = 𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿 ̃𝑞𝐻
and ̃𝑥𝐿 = 𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦 + 𝛽𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿.  Since  the  information ̃𝑞′
𝑀 shared  by  H  is
more precise than the information ̃𝑞𝑀 shared by L, the market maker’s
𝑀 . Next, investor L’s conditional trading
pricing rule is ̃𝑝 = 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔 + 𝜆𝐻 ̃𝑞′
profit on 𝑡 = 1 is
𝐸 [ ̃𝑥𝐿( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑦, ̃𝑞𝐿

̃𝑥𝐿 + (𝛼𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿)

= ̃𝑥𝐿

(

)

]

𝜌 ̃𝑦 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿
1 + 𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

( 𝜌 ̃𝑦 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿
1 + 𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻
𝜌 ̃𝑦 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿
1 + 𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

− 𝜆𝐻

− 𝜆𝜔
)

,

18 

Maximizing the profit yields investor L’s optimal trading strategy ̃𝑥𝐿 =
𝛽𝑦 ̃𝑦 + 𝛽𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐿 with

𝛽𝑦 = −

𝜒𝐻

𝛽𝐻 = −

𝜌𝜆𝐻 + 𝛼𝐿𝜆𝜔

)
+ 𝜌 (𝛼𝑣𝜆𝜔 − 1
)
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌 + 1
)
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌 + 1
2𝜆𝜔
(𝜆𝐻 + 𝛼𝐿𝜆𝜔 + 𝛼𝑣𝜆𝜔 − 1
)
)
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌 + 1
2𝜆𝜔

.

,

For investor H, his conditional trading profit on 𝑡 = 1 is
(

(

)

)

= ̃𝑥𝐻

̃𝑣 − 𝜆𝜔

̃𝑥𝐻 + 𝛽𝑦

+ 𝛽𝐻 ̃𝑣

− 𝜆𝐻 ̃𝑣

,

𝐸 [ ̃𝑥𝐻 ( ̃𝑣 − ̃𝑝)| ̃𝑣, ̃𝑞𝐻

]

𝜌 ̃𝑣 + 𝜒𝐻 ̃𝑞𝐻
𝜌 + 𝜒𝐻

Maximizing the profit yields investor H’s optimal trading strategy ̃𝑥𝐻 =
𝛼𝑣 ̃𝑣 + 𝛼𝐿 ̃𝑞𝐻 with

𝛼𝑣 =

𝛼𝐿 = −

𝜌+𝜒𝐻

1 − 𝜆𝐻 − 𝛽𝐻 𝜆𝜔 − 𝜌(𝜆𝐿+𝛽𝐿𝜆𝜔)
2𝜆𝜔
)
(𝜆𝐻 + 𝛼𝑣𝜆𝜔 − 1
) .
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌 + 1

2𝜆𝜔

𝜒𝐻

,

The market maker’s pricing rule is ̃𝑝 = 𝐸[ ̃𝑣| ̃𝜔, ̃𝑞𝑀 , ̃𝑞′

𝑀 ] = 𝐸[ ̃𝑣| ̃𝜔, ̃𝑞′

𝑀 ]

= 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔 + 𝜆𝐻 ̃𝑞′

𝑀 , where

(𝛽𝐻 + 𝛼𝐿 + 𝛼𝑣 + 𝛽𝑦
𝜆𝜔 = 𝜌𝜒𝐻
(
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜌)
𝜌𝛽2

𝜆𝐻 = 𝜒𝑀

𝐻 + 𝛼2
𝐿

) 𝛤 −1,

+ 2𝜒𝐻 𝛼𝐿𝛽𝑦 + 𝜒𝐻

(

𝜌𝜎2

𝑢 + 𝛽2
𝑦

))

𝛤 −1,

where

))

(𝜒𝐻
+ 𝜌 (𝜒𝑀 + 1
)
(𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌 + 1
𝛤 −1 = 𝛼2
𝐿
(𝜌𝛽𝐻 + 𝛽𝑦
)
(𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌 + 1
+2𝜒𝐻 𝛼𝐿
)
(𝜒𝐻 + 𝜒𝑀 + 1
+𝜌𝛽2
+ 𝜒𝐻
𝐻
+𝜌𝛼2
+ 2𝜌𝛽𝐻 𝜒𝐻
𝑣 + 2𝜌𝛼𝑣𝛽𝑦

+ 𝜌𝛼𝑣
(
𝜌 (𝜒𝑀 + 1
) .
(𝛼𝑣 + 𝛽𝑦

)

)

) 𝜎2

𝑢 + 𝛽2
𝑦

)
(𝜒𝑀 + 𝜌 + 1

Again,  as  before  we  can  solve  for  the  optimal  trading  strategies
{𝛽𝑦, 𝛽𝐻 , 𝛼𝑣, 𝛼𝐿} and the optimal trading rule {𝜆𝑤, 𝜆𝐻 , 𝜆𝐿} and compute
the two investors’ unconditional trading profits 𝜋𝐵

𝐻 and 𝜋𝐵
𝐿 .

Without receiver noise (i.e., 𝜒𝐻 =  ∞ and 𝜒𝑀 =  ∞), if H shares
information, both traders’ profits become zero since the price perfectly
𝐻 =  0 and 𝜋𝐵
reflects  the  fundamental: 𝜋𝐻
𝐻 =  0.  Since
𝐻 > 0 and 𝜋𝐿
𝜋𝑁
𝐻 > 0, not sharing information is the dominant strategy
for H. Furthermore, given that H does not share information, if L shares
information, his profit becomes zero: 𝜋𝐿
𝐿 . Thus, L will not
share his information. This proves the first part of the proposition.

𝐿 = 0 < 𝜋𝑁

𝐿 = 𝜋𝐻

𝐿 = 𝜋𝐵

We next consider the following two cases in the presence of receiver
noise (i.e., 𝜒𝐻 < ∞ and 𝜒𝑀 < ∞) to prove the second part of the
proposition.

𝐻 → 𝜒𝑀 𝜎𝑢

𝐻 −𝜋𝐻

1. Suppose 𝜌 → ∞. Then, 𝜋𝑁

𝐻 →
0 from above, which suggests that it is H’s dominant strategy
not  to  share  information.  Given  that  H  does  not  share  any
information, we can further show that 𝜋𝑁
> 0;
that is, L will not share information either.

𝐿 → 𝜒𝑀 𝜎𝑢

𝐿 −𝜋𝐿

2(𝜒𝑀 +3)

2(𝜒𝑀 +3)

> 0 and 𝜋𝐿

𝐻 −𝜋𝐵

√

√

3

3

2. Suppose 𝜌 < ∞, 𝜒𝐻 → ∞, and 𝜒𝑀 → 0. Then this becomes the
baseline model and we have shown that L shares information.

Appendix B.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103967.

Data availability

Replication package for numerical examples (Original data)

I. Goldstein et al.

References

Antweiler, W., Frank, M.Z., 2004. Is all that talk just noise? The information content

of internet stock message boards. J. Finance 59 (3), 1259–1294.

Balasubramaniam, S., 2024. Information sharing among strategic traders: The role of

disagreement. Working Paper.

Benabou, R., Laroque, G., 1992. Using privileged information to manipulate markets:

Insiders, gurus, and credibility. Q. J. Econ. 107 (3), 921–958.

Boyarchenko, N., Lucca, D.O., Veldkamp, L., 2021. Taking orders and taking notes:
Dealer information sharing in treasury auctions. J. Polit. Econ. 129 (2), 607–645.
Brown, J.R., Ivković, Z., Smith, P.A., Weisbenner, S., 2008. Neighbors matter: Causal
community effects and stock market participation. J. Finance 63 (3), 1509–1531.
Chen, H., De, P., Hu, Y.J., Hwang, B.-H., 2014. Wisdom of crowds: The value of stock
opinions transmitted through social media. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (5), 1367–1403.
Chen, H., Hwang, B.-H., 2022. Listening in on investors’ thoughts and conversations.

J. Financ. Econ. 145 (2), 426–444.

Chen, Z., Luo, J., Xia, C., 2015. A theory of endogenous coalition formation in financial

Colla, P., Mele, A., 2010. Information linkages and correlated trading. Rev. Financial

markets. Working Paper.

Stud. 23 (1), 203–246.

Cowgill, B., Zitzewitz, E., 2015. Corporate prediction markets: Evidence from Google,

Ford, and Firm X. Rev. Econ. Stud. 82 (4), 1309–1341.

Crawford,  S.,  Gray,  W.,  Johnson,  B.R.,  Price,  R.A.,  2018.  What  motivates  buy-side
analysts to share recommendations online? Manage. Sci. 64 (6), 2574–2589.
Crawford, S.S., Gray, W.R., Kern, A.E., 2017. Why do fund managers identify and share

profitable ideas? J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 52 (5), 1903–1926.

Darrough,  M.N.,  1993.  Disclosure  policy  and  competition:  Cournot  vs.  Bertrand.

Account. Rev. 534–561.

Das, S.R., Chen, M.Y., 2007. Yahoo! for amazon: Sentiment extraction from small talk

on the web. Manage. Sci. 53 (9), 1375–1388.

Diamond,  D.W.,  1985.  Optimal  release  of  information  by  firms.  J.  Finance  40  (4),

1071–1094.

Duffie, D., Malamud, S., Manso, G., 2009. Information percolation with equilibrium

search dynamics. Econometrica 77 (5), 1513–1574.

Duffie,  D.,  Malamud,  S.,  Manso,  G.,  2010.  The  relative  contributions  of  private
information sharing and public information releases to information aggregation.
J. Econom. Theory 145 (4), 1574–1601.

Duffie, D., Manso, G., 2007. Information percolation in large markets. Amer. Econ. Rev.

Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2020. Long-run growth of financial data technology. Amer.

Foucault, T., Lescourret, L., 2003. Information sharing, liquidity and transaction costs.

97 (2), 203–209.

Econ. Rev. 110 (8), 2485–2523.

Finance 24, 45–78.

Gal-Or, E., 1985. Information sharing in oligopoly. Econometrica 79, 329–343.
Ganguli, J.V., Yang, L., 2009. Complementarities, multiplicity, and supply information.

2150–2162.

J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 7 (1), 90–115.

Goldstein, I., Yang, L., 2017. Information disclosure in financial markets. Annu. Rev.

Han, B., Yang, L., 2013. Social networks, information acquisition, and asset prices.

Heimer, R.Z., 2016. Peer pressure: Social interaction and the disposition effect. Rev.

Finan. Econ. 9, 101–125.

Manage. Sci. 59 (6), 1444–1457.

Financ. Stud. 29 (11), 3177–3209.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103967 

Hong, H., Kubik, J.D., Stein, J.C., 2005. Thy neighbor’s portfolio: Word-of-mouth effects
in the holdings and trades of money managers. J. Finance 60 (6), 2801–2824.
Hvide, H.K., Östberg, P., 2015. Social interaction at work. J. Financ. Econ. 117 (3),

628–652.

(11), 2762–2775.

Indjejikian, R., Lu, H., Yang, L., 2014. Rational information leakage. Manage. Sci. 60

Jame, R., Johnston, R., Markov, S., Wolfe, M.C., 2016. The value of crowdsourced

earnings forecasts. J. Account. Res. 54 (4), 1077–1110.

James, J.G., Lawler, P., 2011. Optimal policy intervention and the social value of public

information. Amer. Econ. Rev. 101 (4), 1561–1574.

Kaustia, M., Knüpfer, S., 2012. Peer performance and stock market entry. J. Financ.

Econ. 104 (2), 321–338.

Kovbasyuk, S., Pagano, M., 2015. Advertising arbitrage. Working Paper.
Kyle,  A.S.,  1985.  Continuous  auctions  and  insider  trading.  Econometrica  53  (6),

Kyle, A.S., 1989. Informed speculation with imperfect competition. Rev. Econ. Stud. 56

1315–1335.

(3), 317–355.

Liu, Y., 2017. Why do large investors disclose their information?. Working Paper.
Ljungqvist, A., Qian, W., 2016. How constraining are limits to arbitrage? Rev. Financ.

Stud. 29 (8), 1975–2028.

conferences. Working Paper.

Luo,  P.,  2018.  Talking  your  book:  Evidence  from  stock  pitches  at  investment

Manela, A., 2014. The value of diffusing information. J. Financ. Econ. 111 (1), 181–199.
Marmora, P., Rytchkov, O., 2018. Learning about noise. J. Bank. Financ. 89, 209–224.
McAfee, R.P., Schwartz, M., 1994. Opportunism in multilateral vertical contracting:
Nondiscrimination, exclusivity, and uniformity. Amer. Econ. Rev. 210–230.
Morris, S., Shin, H.S., 2002. Social value of public information. Amer. Econ. Rev. 92

(5), 1521–1534.

Myatt, D.P., Wallace, C., 2012. Endogenous information acquisition in coordination

games. Rev. Econ. Stud. 79 (1), 340–374.

Ozsoylev,  H.N.,  Walden,  J.,  2011.  Asset  pricing  in  large  information  networks.  J.

Econom. Theory 146 (6), 2252–2280.

Pasquariello, P., Wang, Y., 2023. Speculation with information disclosure. J. Financ.

Quant. Anal. 1–47.

Pool, V.K., Stoffman, N., Yonker, S.E., 2015. The people in your neighborhood: Social

interactions and mutual fund portfolios. J. Finance 70 (6), 2679–2732.

Schmidt, D., 2019. Stock market rumors and credibility. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (8),

SEC, 2012. Investment adviser use of social media. 2, pp. 1–7, National Examination

3804–3853.

Risk Alert.

Shiller, R.J., 2015. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press.
Shiller, R.J., Pound, J., 1989. Survey evidence on diffusion of interest and information

among investors. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 12 (1), 47–66.

Stein,  J.C.,  2008.  Conversations  among  competitors.  Amer.  Econ.  Rev.  98  (5),

Van Bommel, J., 2003. Rumors. J. Finance 58 (4), 1499–1520.
Vives, X., 1984. Duopoly information equilibrium: Cournot and bertrand. J. Econom.

Theory 34 (1), 71–94.

Vives,  X.,  2010.  Information  and  Learning  in  Markets:  the  Impact  of  Market

Microstructure. Princeton University Press.

Xiong, Y., Yang, L., 2021. Disclosure, competition, and learning from asset prices. J.

Econom. Theory 197, 105331.

Zaloom,  C.,  2003.  Ambiguous  numbers:  Trading  technologies  and  interpretation  in

financial markets. Am. Ethnol. 30 (2), 258–272.

19 

