Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Sustainable finance versus environmental policy: Does greenwashing justify
a taxonomy for sustainable investments?✩
Roman Inderst a,c, Marcus M. Opp b,c,d,e,∗
a Goethe Universität Frankfurt, Germany
b Stockholm School of Economics, Sweden
c CEPR, UK
d ECGI, Belgium
e FTG, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Greenwashing
Sustainability
EU taxonomy
Sustainable Finance Disclosures Regulation
ESG funds
European Green Deal

Our paper analyzes whether a planner should design a taxonomy for sustainable investment products when
conventional tools for environmental regulation can also be used to address externalities arising from firm
production. We first show that the private market provision of ESG funds marketed to retail investors
involves greenwashing, so that a mandatory taxonomy is necessary to generate real effects of sustainable
finance. However, the introduction of such a taxonomy can only improve welfare, on top of optimally
chosen environmental regulation, if financial frictions constrain socially valuable economic activity. Otherwise,
environmental policy alone is sufficient to optimally address externalities.

1.  Introduction

Next to traditional environmental policy, harnessing private finan-
cial investment is increasingly considered important for the ecological
transformation of economic activity. However, the impact of sustain-
able  finance  do  date  has  been  questioned,  see  e.g., Berk  and  van
Binsbergen (forthcoming). In particular, among policymakers, there is
a widespread concern that greenwashing (de Freitas Netto et al., 2020)
is one of the key impediments to achieving real effects of sustainable
finance.

To ensure that sustainable finance is indeed directed towards ac-
tivities  that  have  a  substantial  positive  environmental  impact,  the
European Union (EU,2020) created a taxonomy as part of the Sustain-
able Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR), see Appendix D for more
details. This taxonomy has two key features. First, it defines firm activ-
ities that are considered sustainable, e.g., electricity generation from
wind power is an eligible activity, while electricity generation from
coal is not eligible. Second, to market a fund as sustainable according
to Article 9, each company in a sustainable fund’s portfolio must be EU

taxonomy-aligned. Funds that are not EU taxonomy-conform must be
sold to individual investors as “non-sustainable.”

With this background, our research questions are the following: Is
such a mandatory taxonomy needed to effectively harness investors’
desire to invest sustainably? Additionally, when and why should such
a  tool  be  used  when  environmental  policy  tools,  such  as  regulatory
minimum production standards or emission taxes, are also available?
Our theoretical analysis provides the following high-level insights.
Given  the  prevalence  of  warm-glow  preferences  for  “owning”  funds
with a green label, as documented by Bonnefon et al. (2019) and Heeb
et al. (2023), the market provision of sustainable investments features
a “race to the bottom” in greenwashing.1 A regulatory framework is
necessary  to  impact  firms’  investment  decisions.  However,  the  mere
potential to generate real effects, through such a mandatory taxonomy,
is not sufficient to justify government intervention via financial regula-
tion: In the absence of environmental policy failure, a taxonomy will
only  lead  to  welfare  improvements  if  financial  constraints  constrain

✩
Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We are grateful to an anonymous referee, Bruno Biais, Alexander Guembel, Augustin Landier, Stefano Lovo,
Adriano Rampini, Pablo Ruiz-Verdu, Per Strömberg, Jean Tirole, and participants at Stanford, Duke, HEC Paris, Stockholm School of Economics, Universidad
Carlos III de Madrid, UCLA, and the Corporate Finance Theory Symposium for their helpful comments and suggestions. This project has received funding from
the Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg (MMW) foundation.

∗ Corresponding author at: Stockholm School of Economics, Sweden.

E-mail addresses:

inderst@finance.uni-frankfurt.de (R. Inderst), marcus.opp@hhs.se (M.M. Opp).

1 This is consistent with widespread concerns about vague (market) standards (Berg et al., 2022) and greenwashing (de Freitas Netto et al., 2020). According
to PwC’s Asset and Wealth Management Revolution 2022 report, 71% of fund managers themselves believe that greenwashing is a common practice. Indeed,
76% simply plan to relabel existing products so they can be marketed as ESG investment products.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103954
Received 22 February 2024; Received in revised form 3 October 2024; Accepted 6 October 2024
Available online 23 October 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

socially valuable economic activity. Otherwise, environmental policy
alone is sufficient to rectify inefficiencies caused by externalities.

We derive these results in a parsimonious general equilibrium pro-
duction framework. Each firm can choose the scale and sustainability
of its production, i.e., costly abatement of externalities. Financing from
households,  either  directly  or  through  funds,  is  limited  by  outside
financing constraints, building on Holmström and Tirole (1997).2 We
extend  their  model  by  microfounding  firm  payoffs  in  a  competitive
product market, which allows us to account for consumer surplus in
the welfare analysis.

As  a  benchmark,  we  consider  an  economy  without  sustainable
investors to see how far the planner can go purely with environmen-
tal regulation: minimum standards, e.g., such as mandatory catalytic
converters, and (carbon) taxes. The planner not only cares about firms
choosing  the  appropriate  degree  of  abatement  but  also  accounts  for
real activity, as determined by aggregate production. In the first-best
allocation, firms choose to abate up to the point where the marginal
cost of abatement equals the marginal social benefit, and at the optimal
aggregate output level, the marginal consumer’s reservation price just
equals the marginal social cost of production (including the external-
ity). Now, if the planner can only avail herself of environmental policy
tools,  but  no  direct  subsidies,3 both  over-  and  underproduction  can
occur in equilibrium depending on the severity of financial constraints.
The optimum environmental policy now trades off real activity against
externalities.  Environmental  policy  is  optimally  less  stringent  than
first-best when financial constraints bind.

We then incorporate investors with sustainability concerns into our
model. How to best capture this demand for sustainable investments
is the subject of an ongoing debate. If small household investors were
affected by externalities like global warming, but have self-interested
“homo oeconomicus” preferences, they would treat aggregate externali-
ties as given and behave like “purely profit-motivated investors,” which
is at odds with the dramatic rise in funds with an ESG label. Instead,
studies by Bonnefon et al. (2019) or Heeb et al. (2023) show support
for  investor  preferences  that  go  beyond  self  interest.4 In  particular,
their results suggest that individual investors’ “non-pecuniary benefits
accrue  through  stock ownership (value  alignment),  not  through  the
actual impact (consequences) of investment decisions.”5

We  build  on  this  empirical  literature  and  assume  that  a  subset
of these investors derives additional non-consequentialist warm-glow
from owning “ESG funds,” which acts as an additional return (see Riedl
and Smeets (2017)).6 To capture the heterogeneity of household pref-
erences, we assume that the intensity of this warm-glow varies across
households according to some distribution function. Since the warm-
glow effect resulting from a purchase of “moral satisfaction” without

2 The relevance of such financial constraints for abatement investments has
been empirically documented by Bartram et al. (2022), Xu and Kim (2022),
and Lanteri and Rampini (2023).

3 As  is  standard  on  the  literature  on  financial  constraints  following
Holmström and Tirole (1997), we assume that the marginal cost of public
funds  (taxation  distortions)  is  sufficiently  high  so  that  the  planner  cannot
remove financial constraints for all firms in the economy. Relatedly, Hoffmann
et  al. (2017)  analyze  the  optimal  design  of  subsidized  loans  to  finance
abatement activities in an asymmetric information environment.

4 See Moisson (2020) and Dangl et al. (2023) for how altruistic preferences

can be related to different ethical norms.

5 The specification of non-consequentialist preferences also receives support
by  a  large  literature  in  environmental  and  resource  economics  that  elicits
preferences.  For  instance,  elicited  willingness-to-pay  frequently  fails  a  so-
called “scope test” or “adding-up test”: Subjects’ willingness-to-pay is relatively
insensitive to the actual impact of the respective scenario change, e.g., the
number  of  animals  saved,  see Boyle  et  al. (1994)  or Desvousges  et  al.
(2012) for prominent studies on these effects and Kahneman (2000) for an
explanation.

6 Our qualitative results are robust to preference specifications for which

the strength of the warm-glow is also affected by impact, see Appendix C.

2 

any impact, see Kahneman and Knetsch (1992), we model it as a purely
decisional  utility  that  does  not  (directly)  enter  the  social  planner’s
objective, as in Broccardo et al. (2022).

How does the private market respond to such preferences? As is
intuitive,  the  market  satisfies  the  demand  for  green  ESG  funds  by
labeling all firms as green, consistent with the blatant greenwashing
observed in practice. A “real” sustainable fund that sets more stringent
sustainability requirements cannot compete with funds that offer moral
satisfaction at lower (no) return discount. In the market equilibrium,
sustainable finance does not generate a greenium for sustainable firms
and, hence, yields no impact.

A  mandatory  taxonomy  can  prevent  such  a  race  to  the  bottom
by imposing a lower bar on sustainability investments of taxonomy-
conform firms (which may not be under-cut by private sustainability
labels). In equilibrium, a fraction of firms will meet this more stringent
sustainability requirement of the taxonomy and, in return, receive a
return  subsidy  (greenium)  that  just  offsets  the  increased  production
costs associated with abatement. The share of taxonomy-conforming
firms  is  determined  by  the  fraction  of  retail  investors  whose  warm
glow outweighs the necessary return sacrifice. The regulator now faces
the following trade-off. By increasing the sustainability threshold, each
abiding  firm  causes  fewer  externalities,  but  also  requires  a  higher
financing  subsidy  to  offset  the  higher  production  cost  to  meet  the
standard. Given a downward sloping supply of sustainable capital, in
terms of the accepted return sacrifice, this leads to a smaller share of
sustainable firms in equilibrium.

However,  does  the  prevention  of  greenwashing  imply  that  intro-
ducing a taxonomy is always socially desirable if environmental policy
tools are optimally chosen? We show that the introduction of a sustain-
able investment category is not beneficial if firms’ internal funds are
sufficiently high so that financial constraints do not prohibit aggregate
production  at  the  socially  efficient  scale.  Environmental  regulation
alone is sufficient.7

In  contrast,  with  acute  financial  frictions,  stricter  environmental
regulation  in  isolation  would  exacerbate  underproduction.  By  acti-
vating a subsidy from sustainably-oriented investors, the planner can
mitigate this trade-off between imposing a higher minimum standard
(or environmental tax) and, at the same time, inefficiently shrinking the
economy. The availability of two tools allows the planner to increase
aggregate output while keeping the weighted average social cost con-
stant. As preferences for sustainable investment become stronger, this
favors, on the margin, an increase in the sustainability standard. Given
the  time  trend  of  preferences  for  sustainability  in  recent  years,  our
model predicts that optimal sustainability standards should gradually
increase over time.

Another potential rationale for a taxonomy is that environmental
policy is suboptimally lax. In this case, a taxonomy partially mitigates
environmental policy failure by inducing a fraction of firms to produce
more sustainably. However, as the taxonomy is a much less effective
tool  to  mitigate  environmental  externalities,  this  rationale  does  not
address the more fundamental question of why environmental policy
is ineffective.8 In addition to possessing less effective tools, as pointed
out by Tirole (2023) as well as Oehmke and Opp (2022), such man-
date shifts of financial regulators have additional drawbacks, such as
questions of institutional conflicts and lack of policy coordination.

7 We note that this result even extends to the case in which investors have
consequentialist preferences (as long as the warm-glow from impact does not
additionally contribute to welfare).

8 Recently, Allen et al. (2023) have taken a different, positive perspective
by  modeling  society’s  choice  (through  voting)  over  environmental  policy,
comparing  the  outcomes  when  households  do  or  do  not  have  access  to
sustainable investments. Relatedly, Döttling et al. (2024) analyzes the feedback
effects  between  a  “one-person  one-vote”  political  system  and  a  “one-share
one-vote” corporate governance regime.

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

Our paper builds on a rapidly growing literature on the theory of
socially responsible investing.9 This literature consists mainly of two
exclusion (following the pioneering paper by Heinkel et al.
strands:
(2001)) and impact investing,10 cf. Oehmke and Opp (forthcoming) for
a detailed comparison.11 Since we aim to model investor demand for
sustainable finance products by small retail investors, our model does
not  feature  large  activist  investors,  which  are  studied  in Chowdhry
et al. (2018), Oehmke and Opp (forthcoming), Biais and Landier (2022)
and Gupta  et  al. (2022).  Instead,  our  investors  are  small  and  non-
consequentialist as in Pastor et al. (2021), but the optimal design of
a taxonomy allows the regulator to channel the aggregate supply of
sustainable finance to achieve impact.12

Our paper shares with Piccolo et al. (2022) that it considers the
interaction of socially responsible investors and endogenous product
market outcomes.13 The papers differ in their objective. The positive
analysis  of Piccolo  et  al. (2022)  focuses  on  the  strategic  interaction
of  firms  in  a  setup  with  market  power;  this  effect  is  moot  in  our
competitive setting. Instead, our normative paper analyzes the rationale
for a taxonomy and its connection to environmental policy. The papers
also  differ  in  terms  of  the  mechanism  of  how  sustainable  finance
generates  impact:  While  investors  in Piccolo  et  al. (2022)  influence
company decisions via ownership (control rights), our investors induce
sustainability  investments  via  a  reduction  in  the  cost  of  capital  for
taxonomy-conform firms.

None of the literature has addressed the two key questions of our
analysis, i.e., whether such subsidized financing is socially beneficial
in view of alternative, more direct environmental policy instruments
and how to optimally design a sustainable investment classification.14
The  latter  issue  taps  into  a  large  theoretical  literature  on  optimal
certification (see Bizzotto and Harstad (2023) for a recent contribution
and a detailed survey). This literature, however, typically considers the
perspective of a profit-maximizing certifier and the design of labels for
products or services when purchasers have limited information about
quality.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the
benchmark economy in which all investors care only about financial
returns and, consequently, the social planner can only avail herself of
environmental  policy  instruments.  In  Section 3 we  introduce  house-
holds  with  sustainability  preferences  and  provide  conditions  under
which the introduction of a sustainable investment category is optimal
(and,  if  so,  which  threshold  should  be  optimally  chosen).  Section 4
concludes. All proofs are relegated to Appendix A.

9 See e.g., Chowdhry et al. (2018), Davies and Van Wesep (2018), Green
and Roth (forthcoming), Landier and Lovo (forthcoming), Oehmke and Opp
(forthcoming), Edmans  et  al. (2022), Pastor  et  al. (2021), Pedersen  et  al.
(2021), as well as Favilukis et al. (2024).
10 Laux  and  Mahieux (2024)  analyzes  how  a  firm  optimally  designs  the
precision of its (climate risk) measurement and accounting system with an
eye on its bargaining perspective vis–a-vis impact investors.
11 In  particular, Oehmke  and  Opp (forthcoming), Landier  and  Lovo
(forthcoming) as well as Green and Roth (forthcoming) have highlighted how
“value aligned” preferences or “narrow” investment mandates typically fail to
generate real impact. Apart from the different focus (regulation), our paper
extends (Oehmke and Opp, forthcoming) in two ways. First, we incorporate
retail investors with empirically relevant warm-glow preferences in a tractable
way. Second, firm payoffs are determined in a product market equilibrium
rather than exogenously specified, similar to Inderst and Heider (2022).
12 In  contrast  to Pastor  et  al. (2021),  preferences  are  risk-neutral,  which
ensures tractability, i.e., there is no effect on risk-premia which result from
imperfect risk-sharing.
13 Kaufmann et al. (2024) instead focus exclusively on the product market
by  providing  a  framework  to  analyze  competitive  equilibria  with  rational
consequentialist consumers.
14 Biais and Landier (2022), Döttling and Rola-Janicka (2022), and Oehmke
and Opp (2022) have analyzed the interaction of environmental regulation
with  the  financial  sector  when  environmental  regulation  is  subject  to  a
commitment problem. There is no commitment problem in our paper.

2.  Benchmark economy

We initially analyze a benchmark economy in which all households
(investors) are purely profit-motivated. In such an economy, there is
no demand for sustainable investing and, hence, there is no scope for
a “sustainable investments” taxonomy either.

We  first  describe  the  model  ingredients  and  objective  functions
firms, households and the regulator. Then, for given environmental
of
regulation, we derive the equilibrium financing and investment deci-
sions by firms, which determines aggregate output and externalities.
This first part extends Holmström and Tirole (1997) by microfounding
firm  payoffs  in  a  competitive  product  market.  We  then  characterize
optimal environmental regulation, which is the first step to answering
whether there is additional scope for “sustainable investments” and the
taxonomy from a welfare perspective.

2.1.  Model primitives

Firms. The economy consists of a unit mass of profit-maximizing firms
indexed by 𝑖, each endowed with internal funds 𝐴 > 0 (which, thus,
also corresponds to aggregate internal funds).15 Firms compete in the
product  market:  Given  individual  firm  output 𝑞𝑖,  each  firm  reaps  a
market price of 𝑃 (𝑞) where 𝑞 = ∫ 1
0 𝑞𝑖𝑑 𝑖 denotes aggregate output and
𝑃 satisfies the usual conditions, i.e., 𝑃 is differentiable with 𝑃 ′ < 0
and lim𝑞→∞ 𝑃 (𝑞)  =  0.  To  focus  on  the  effect  of  socially  responsible
investment, we assume that sustainable production cannot ensure a price
premium in the product market.16

The production technology choice features a trade-off between prof-
≤ 𝜃max, which arises, for example, from
itability and sustainability 𝜃𝑖
the costly installation of air filters and 𝜃𝑖 governing their quality. We
assume that production generates negative externality of 𝜌 (𝜃max − 𝜃𝑖
)
per unit of output while investment costs per unit of output are given by
𝑐 (𝜃𝑖
)
, where 𝑐 is a strictly increasing and convex function with 𝑐′(0) = 0
and lim𝜃→𝜃max 𝑐′ (𝜃) = ∞.17 In the context of carbon emissions, one can
thus interpret
as the firm’s carbon intensity and 𝜌 > 0 as the
social cost per unit of carbon emissions. A firm 𝑖 is carbon-neutral if
its sustainability choice satisfies 𝜃𝑖 = 𝜃max. The total cost of production,
𝑐 (𝜃𝑖
) 𝑞𝑖, needs to be financed by a combination of internal funds 𝐴𝑖
≤ 𝐴
and external funds.

(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑖

)

External financing is subject to financing frictions adopted from the
workhorse model of Holmström and Tirole (1997). Specifically, the sale
of output is only successful with probability one if the owner-manager
exerts unobservable effort. If she shirks, she obtains a per-unit private
benefit 𝐵 > 0, but with probability 𝛥𝑝 > 0 no sale occurs. As is standard
in the literature, we assume that the agency rent 𝐵
is low enough
𝛥𝑝
so that shirking is off equilibrium (see exact condition in Appendix-
Lemma A.1).

Household investors. External funds are in abundant supply and pro-
vided by atomistic, risk-neutral households that seek to maximize their
expected net financial payoff. In addition to the investment opportuni-
ties offered by firms, households have access to a storage technology
that offers a fixed net return 𝑟0 (which is normalized to zero). This
is also the return that firms realize on assets that they do not invest
productively.

15 It  is  straightforward  to  extend  the  analysis  to  the  case  where  firms
differ in internal funds, given that each firm is atomistic and that our main
characterization pertains to aggregate output.
16 See Hakenes and Schliephake (2021), Broccardo et al. (2022), and Piccolo
et al. (2022) for models that also consider socially responsible consumption.
17 For  simplicity,  we  assume  that  firms  are  homogeneous  (and,  yet,  het-
erogeneous sustainability choices emerge in equilibrium, see Proposition 3).
In  contrast, Lanteri  and  Rampini (2023)  analyze  the  implications  of  firm
heterogeneity in terms of financial constraints for the technology adoption of
green technologies and the composition of the capital stock.

3 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Regulator. A  key  objective  of  our  analysis  is  to  investigate  the  rel-
evance  of  sustainable  finance  and  its  taxonomy  in  the  presence  of
standard,  environmental  policy  tools.  Motivated  by  its  widespread
use  in  practice,  our  main  analysis  considers  the  tool  of  a  minimum
sustainability standard 𝜃𝑚 as the main environmental policy tool. In the
context of emissions, such regulations impose limits on the emissions
intensity, 𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚, for example, by requiring the use of high-quality
air filters or catalytic converters. Likewise, it can require investments
in  protection  against  health  hazards  for  workers  or  undue  harm  on
animals. Importantly, we show that all of our results continue to hold
if a regulator could, in addition, impose a tax 𝜏 per unit of social cost,
see Remark 1.

Given production choices 𝜃𝑖 and 𝑞𝑖, welfare, comprises first, gross
consumer welfare; second, investment costs; and third, the externality:

𝑞

𝛺 = ∫

0

𝑃 (𝑞)𝑑 𝑞 − ∫ 𝑞𝑖𝑐 (𝜃𝑖

) 𝑑 𝑖 − 𝜌 ∫ 𝑞𝑖

(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑖

) 𝑑 𝑖,

(1)

which,  to  simplify  expressions,  already  uses  the  result  that  shirking
is off equilibrium (see Proof of Appendix- Lemma A.1). The regulator
chooses 𝜃𝑚 as to maximize welfare in (1).

We presume that the economic activity is socially valuable, 𝛺 > 0, at
least under optimal regulation. It is, thus, necessary that the consumer
surplus on the initial unit exceeds the marginal social cost, the sum of
the marginal private investment costs 𝑐(𝜃) and externalities 𝜃max − 𝜃 for
some 𝜃, i.e.,

𝑃 (0) > min

𝜃

[𝑐(𝜃) + 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃)

] .

(A1)

Timeline. We consider the following logical sequence of events. At 𝑡 = 0
the regulator chooses the minimum production standard 𝜃𝑚 (and, as in
our extension, a tax on externalities). At 𝑡 = 1, given this regulatory
environment, firms then simultaneously choose their optimal sustain-
) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐴𝑖.
ability level 𝜃𝑖, output 𝑞𝑖, as well as external financing 𝑐 (𝜃𝑖
Households allocate funds to firms and the storage technology. At 𝑡 = 2,
managers choose whether to exert effort or not, and output 𝑞𝑖 is sold
at price 𝑃 (𝑞).

First-best benchmark. Before analyzing the equilibrium outcome of the
just presented economy, it is useful to characterize first-best welfare
𝛺𝐹 𝐵. As firms are homogeneous, first-best welfare can be characterized
using two control variables, total output 𝑞𝐹 𝐵 and a uniform standard
𝜃𝐹 𝐵 across firms. The optimal sustainability level equates, per unit of
production, the saved social cost of the externality with the marginal
increase in investment cost,
𝑐′(𝜃𝐹 𝐵) = 𝜌.
The  optimal  aggregate  output  and  market  size,  in  turn,  equates
marginal consumer surplus with marginal cost of production, compris-
ing the externality:
𝑃 (𝑞𝐹 𝐵) = 𝑐(𝜃𝐹 𝐵) + 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵).

(2)

(3)

2.2.  Market equilibrium

We  refer  to  the  market  equilibrium  as  the  equilibrium  behavior
of  private  agents,  firms  and  households,  for  a  given  regulatory  en-
vironment,  i.e., 𝜃𝑚.  We  endogenize  the  optimal  choice  of 𝜃𝑚 in  the
subsequent  section.  This  market  equilibrium  is  characterized  by  the
following conditions:

Definition 1. Given a minimum standard 𝜃𝑚, a Market Equilibrium is
characterized  by  a  co-investment,  production  and  effort  strategy  for
each firm, and an investment strategy for each investor such that:

(a) Each  firm 𝑖 chooses  its  coinvestment 𝐴𝑖

≤ 𝐴,  its  technology
≥ 𝜃𝑚, its output 𝑞𝑖 and its unobservable effort to maximize its

𝜃𝑖
net payoff inclusive of private benefits.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

(b) Investors decide to allocate their funds to the storage technology
and capital provision into each firm to maximize their net payoffs.

(c) Markets for capital clear.

Individual firms’ financing and production choices. Since this benchmark
economy only features profit-motivated agents, there is, for now, no
benefit from exceeding the minimum standard and all firms optimally
𝑖 = 𝜃𝑚.  We  now  characterize  an  individual  firm’s  optimal
choose 𝜃∗
financing contracts yielding coinvestment 𝐴∗

𝑖 and output 𝑞∗
𝑖 .

As  in Holmström  and  Tirole (1997),  the  moral  hazard  problem
limits  outside  financing  capacity  and  output  of  each  firm.  Different
from Holmström and Tirole (1997), the optimal choices of each indi-
vidual firm are affected by the financing and supply decisions of other
firms since the product market price is pinned down by the aggregate
supply of all firms 𝑞. As a result, firms only have an incentive to operate
if aggregate supply is sufficiently low so that the product price exceeds
the cost of production,
𝑃 (𝑞) ≥ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
In the absence of prohibitively costly (and suboptimal) environmental
) <  𝑃 (0), the output quantity 𝑞 adjusts so that
regulation, i.e., 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
Condition (4) is satisfied in equilibrium (see Proposition 1).

(4)

) .

Let 𝐷𝑖 denote the promised repayment to household investors, then
incentive compatibility of effort requires that the owner’s payoff under
effort exceed the expected payoff under shirking (inclusive of private
benefits),

𝑞𝑖𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝐷𝑖

≥ (1 − 𝛥𝑝)

[𝑞𝑖𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝐷𝑖

]

+ 𝐵 𝑞𝑖.

(IC)

The  investors’  participation  constraint (IR) requires  that  outside
investors earn at least the required return 𝑟0 = 0 on their investment of
𝑐 (𝜃𝑖
𝐷𝑖

) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐴𝑖, where 𝐴𝑖
≥ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑖
) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐴𝑖.

≤ 𝐴 denotes the insider’s coinvestment:

(IR)

In equilibrium, the household investors’ (IR) constraint always binds
since household capital is in ample supply and investors behave com-
petitively.

When  the  profitability  Condition (4) holds,  standard  arguments
imply  that  it  is  (weakly)  optimal  for  the  firm  to  fully  co-invest  in-
𝑖 = 𝐴. Binding (IR), the absence of shirking, and full
ternal funds, 𝐴∗
coinvestment imply that the firm’s gross payoff satisfies:

𝑈𝑖 = 𝑞𝑖

[𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

)]

+ 𝐴.

(5)

Since individual firms take the market price as given, the objective ((5))
is linear in 𝑞𝑖. Again by condition (4), it is then (weakly) optimal to
produce at maximal scale.

In equilibrium, an individual firm’s maximal scale is constrained
by  financial  frictions,  as  we  will  formally  show  in Corollary  2 to
Proposition 1. Maximal scale is, thus, determined by binding (IR) and
(IC) which implies that
𝑞∗
𝑖 = 𝑘 (𝑞) 𝐴,
where the production capacity multiplier 𝑘 (𝑞) satisfies18

(6)

𝑘 (𝑞) =

1
[𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

)] > 0.

𝐵
𝛥𝑝

−

(7)

This  expression  is  an  extension  of  the  standard  multiplier  in
Holmström and Tirole (1997) by incorporating product market com-
petition. The production capacity multiplier is a decreasing function of
𝑞 because larger aggregate output pushes down product prices (and,
hence profitability). Using these optimal choices 𝜃∗
𝑖 = 𝐴 and
𝑖 (conditional on 𝑞), the indirect utility of each firm is given by:
𝑞∗
𝑈 ∗
𝑖 =

𝑖 = 𝜃𝑚, 𝐴∗

𝐴𝑘 (𝑞) .

(8)

𝐵
𝛥𝑝

18 Corollary 2 implies that 𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

) < 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝 so that 𝑘 (𝑞) > 0.

4 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

We now determine the aggregate output, 𝑞 = ∫ 𝑞𝑖𝑑𝑖 that results from
the optimal behavior of individual firms.

2.3.  Optimal environmental regulation

Aggregate output. While each individual firm’s supply is constrained by
financial constraints, aggregate economic output, 𝑞∗ = ∫ 𝑞∗
𝑖 𝑑𝑖 is only
impacted by financial constraints if firms cannot jointly secure sufficient
external financing to produce the zero-profit output ̄𝑞 solving
𝑃 ( ̄𝑞) = 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

(9)

) .

Proposition 1 intuitively reveals that aggregate production at the
frictionless level ̄𝑞 only occurs in equilibrium if firms’ aggregate internal
funds 𝐴 are sufficiently high.

Proposition 1 (Aggregate Output 𝑞∗). If 𝑃 (0) > 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
so that environ-
mental regulation is not prohibitively costly, the economy produces 𝑞∗ > 0
which can be characterized as follows:

)

1. If aggregate  internal funds 𝐴 are sufficiently small, 𝐴  <  ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝,
financial frictions constrain aggregate output of the economy, 𝑞∗ < ̄𝑞,
which solves:
𝑞∗ = 𝐴𝑘 (𝑞∗) .

(10)

2. If 𝐴 ≥ ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝, aggregate output is unaffected by financial frictions,

𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞.

The comparative results of aggregate output follow immediately.

Corollary 1. Output 𝑞∗ is increasing in aggregate internal funds 𝐴 (strictly
so as long as 𝐴 < ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝) and strictly decreasing in the minimum standard
𝜃𝑚.

Intuitively, larger aggregate internal funds increase aggregate out-
put by mitigating the effects of external financing frictions, leading to
larger output. In contrast, a higher minimum standard increases firms’
production costs resulting in lower aggregate supply.19 We now turn to
the resulting equilibrium financing capacity and firm rents.

Corollary 2 (Equilibrium Financing Capacity and Rents). For any 𝐴 > 0,
) <
the  equilibrium  capacity  multiplier, 𝑘 (𝑞∗),  is  finite  as 𝑃 (𝑞∗) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
𝐵∕𝛥𝑝. Firms earn scarcity rents in equilibrium, 𝑃 (𝑞∗) > 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
𝑖 > 𝐴,
⇔ 𝑈 ∗
if and only if 𝐴 < ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝.

)

Thus,  with  endogenous  product  market  competition,  the  output
quantity always adjusts so that the firms’ reward, the price 𝑃 (𝑞∗), is
never so high that firms become financially unconstrained (and (IC)
would be slack). This occurs because, in aggregate, the industry exhibits
decreasing returns to scale as the inverse demand is downward sloping.
When aggregate output is constrained by financial frictions, 𝐴 < ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝,
the  scarcity  rents  imply  that  all  firms  lever  up  to  the  maximum.
Instead, when the economy produces the zero-profit output ̄𝑞, firms are
indifferent between producing and using the storage technology so that
𝑈 ∗

We finally remark on an additional feature related to the endoge-
nous  product  price.  When  firms’  internal  funds  go  to  zero, 𝐴 → 0,
)
aggregate output converges to zero only if 𝑃 (0) ≤ 𝐵
, i.e., only
𝛥𝑝
if the incentive constraint binds at the highest product price. Otherwise,
when 𝐴 → 0 aggregate output converges to

+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

𝑖 = 𝐴.

𝑞min = 𝑃 −1

(

)
)

𝐵
𝛥𝑝

+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

,

(11)

which is still strictly lower than ̄𝑞.

19 The rationale for why equilibrium output strictly decreases with a higher
minimum  standard  is  slightly  different  in  the  two  cases  of Proposition  1:
When aggregate output is not constrained by financial frictions, this follows
immediately from the zero-profit condition for 𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞. Otherwise, the higher
costs of production reduce the capacity multiplier, 𝑘.

5 

We now turn to the planner’s optimal choice of the minimum stan-
dard. Given the equilibrium characterization, the planner’s objective in
(1) simplifies to

𝑞∗(𝜃𝑚)

𝛺 = ∫
0

𝑃 (𝑞)𝑑 𝑞 − 𝑞∗ [𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

)

+ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚)

] .

(12)

The socially optimal choice of the single policy instrument, character-
ized by the first-order condition 𝑑 𝛺
= 0, aims to balance deviations
𝑑 𝜃𝑚
from  the  two  separate  first-order  conditions  for  the  technology  and
quantity in the first-best benchmark, see (2) and (3):

𝜌 − 𝑐′ (𝜃𝑚

)

=

[𝑃 (𝑞∗)

− 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

)

− 𝜌 (𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚

)] ,

(13)

𝑑 𝑞∗
𝑑 𝜃𝑚
𝑞∗ (𝜃𝑚

)

|
|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|
|

where we have made explicit the dependency of equilibrium output,
)
𝑞∗ (𝜃𝑚
, see Corollary 1. The left hand-side of (13) captures the socially
optimal technology choice, cf. condition (2). The right-hand side cap-
tures condition (3), which is the marginal social surplus of an additional
unit  of  output  fixing  technology 𝜃𝑚,  scaled  by  the  semi-elasticity  of
|
output to environmental standards,
, that results from the
|
|
|
feedback  effect  of  the  minimum  standard  on  aggregate  output.  We
obtain:

∕𝑞∗ (𝜃𝑚

𝑑 𝑞∗
𝑑 𝜃𝑚

)|
|
|
|

)

(14)

≥ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵),

Proposition 2 (Environmental Regulation).If the agency problem is suffi-
ciently strong,
𝐵
𝛥𝑝
there  exists  a  threshold  for  internal  funds 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 such  that  the  optimal
standard satisfies ̃𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 for 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 and ̃𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 for 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵. At
𝐴 = 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, first-best welfare is achieved, i.e., ̃𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and 𝑞∗ (𝜃𝐹 𝐵
= 𝑞𝐹 𝐵.
If 𝐵
< 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵), the optimal standard always satisfies ̃𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.
𝛥𝑝
We  first  consider  the  case  in  which  the  agency  constraints  are
sufficiently strong, so that Condition (14) holds. To see the logic for
Proposition 2, set first 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. Condition (14) ensures that when
internal  funds  are  sufficiently  low  (precisely,  when 𝐴  <  𝐴𝐹 𝐵),  the
economy produces output below the socially efficient scale, 𝑞∗ < 𝑞𝐹 𝐵.20
Then,  the  marginal  social  surplus  of  an  additional  unit  of  output  is
strictly positive, 𝑃 (𝑞∗) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

− 𝜌 (𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚
Now,  suppose  instead  that  internal  funds  are  not  scarce,  so  that
when 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, output expands until 𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞. As firms do not take
into account the externality, there is overproduction (from a planner
perspective), ̄𝑞 > 𝑞𝐹 𝐵. With 𝑞∗ being strictly increasing (and continu-
ous) in internal funds, there exists a unique level 𝐴 = 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 at which
𝑞∗ = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵. This tension between over- and underproduction is the main
force behind the hump-shaped effect of internal funds on welfare, as
illustrated in the right panel of Fig. 1.

) > 0.

)

If the converse of (14) holds, output is always excessively high at
𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, even as 𝐴 → 0, and we would find ourselves only at the part
where welfare decreases in 𝐴. Consequently, it is always optimal to set
̃𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

In  the  presence  of  two  frictions  –  financing  constraints  and  pro-
duction externalities – one would expect one tool to be insufficient to
restore first-best. In particular, while the planner can force all firms
to  choose 𝜃𝐹 𝐵,  this  policy  choice  does  not  automatically  ensure  the
socially optimal quantity 𝑞𝐹 𝐵 since output is endogenously supplied by
profit-maximizing firms. However, as we have shown, first best welfare
𝛺𝐹 𝐵 is  achieved  when  financial  constraints  are  “just  right,”  which
stands in stark difference to canonical corporate finance models, where
financial constraints reduce total surplus as they prevent firms from
exploiting profitable investment opportunities. In the presence of social

20 If the converse of (14) holds, even as 𝐴 → 0 the then strictly positive limit
𝑞min, as given by (11), strictly exceeds 𝑞𝐹 𝐵 (cf. the proof of Proposition 2).

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

Fig. 1.  Optimal minimum standard as a sole policy tool. The graph in the left panel plots the optimal minimum standard ̃𝜃𝑚 and the associated equilibrium output 𝑞∗ ( ̃𝜃𝑚
as a function of aggregate internal funds 𝐴 for the case 𝐵
(right
scale). The right panel plots the resulting welfare under the optimal minimum production standard ̃𝜃𝑚. For 𝐴 = 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 , first-best welfare 𝛺𝐹 𝐵 is achieved. Financial constraints do
not bind for 𝐴 ≥ ̄𝐴.

≥ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 ). Note that the respective units on the 𝑦-axis have different scales for ̃𝜃𝑚 (left scale) and 𝑞∗ ( ̃𝜃𝑚

𝛥𝑝

)

)

externalities, financial constraints are thus no longer unambiguously
harmful.

We now turn to the optimal choice of ̃𝜃𝑚, which varies with 𝐴 so
as to mitigate over- or underproduction from a social perspective. For
𝐴  <  𝐴𝐹 𝐵, to avoid “overshrinking” the economy, the environmental
standard, solving (13), is optimally chosen to be less stringent ̃𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.
For 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, to counter overproduction from a social perspective, the
optimal standard appears to be excessively stringent, ̃𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 (see the
(𝐴𝐹 𝐵, ̄𝐴)
, the economy underproduces
left panel in Fig. 1). For 𝐴 ∈
from a private perspective (as production is still financially profitable)
and  overproduces  from  a  social  perspective.  Once 𝐴  > ̄𝐴,  financial
constraints no longer bind (at the optimal choice ̃𝜃𝑚), and the opti-
mally policy no longer varies with 𝐴. The optimal minimum standard,
denoted by ̄𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and the realized output 𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞 ( ̄𝜃𝑚
correspond to
the optimal policy choices in an economy without financial frictions.21

)

Robustness  under  (a  combined)  carbon  tax. We  now  demonstrate  the
robustness of our main results under broader environmental policies.
In particular, we allow the regulator to also impose a tax 𝜏 per unit
of externality (so that the standard Pigouvian tax level would be 𝜏 =
𝜌).  To  avoid  overburdening  the  reader  with  additional  notation,  we
summarize our main point upfront and relegate the formal analysis to
Appendix B.

Remark 1 (Minimum Standard and Carbon Tax).

Suppose that Condition (14) holds and the planner can use both a
minimum standard and a carbon tax. If 𝐴  <  𝐴𝐹 𝐵, first-best welfare
cannot be attained. The optimal carbon tax is zero and the optimal
minimum standard and output are characterized by Propositions 1 and
2. If 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, first-best welfare can be achieved by setting 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵
and a positive tax 𝜏 > 0.

If 𝐴  <  𝐴𝐹 𝐵, it is strictly suboptimal to impose a carbon tax be-
cause this tax eats into pledgeable income, exacerbates firms financial
constraints, and, hence leads to additional reduction in output. There-
fore, the planner only uses the minimum standard as characterized by
Proposition 2.22 In contrast, if 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, the tax allows the planner to

21 The switch from binding financial constraints to non-binding constraints
causes a jump in the policy function exactly at the level of internal funds
where the planner is indifferent between causing financial constraints or not.
This jump arises because, for 𝐴 = ̄𝐴, the objective function has two global
maxima. See details in Proof of Proposition 2.

limit overproduction, so that 𝑞∗ = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵, while at the same time setting
the minimum standard to 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

Intuitively, environmental policy tools work well to mitigate pro-
duction externalities, but not financial frictions. Therefore, even op-
timal  environmental  policy  fails  to  restore  first-best  when  financial
constraints  are  sufficiently  severe, 𝐴  <  𝐴𝐹 𝐵.  We  now  analyze  if
sustainable finance can make a difference and whether a taxonomy is
needed.

3.  Full model

3.1.  Preferences for sustainable investing

Maintaining the assumption that there is ample supply of capital by
purely profit-motivated investors, we now incorporate investors with
sustainability preferences. These investors with concerns for sustain-
ability are endowed with funds of size 𝐾. For ease of exposition, we
stipulate that 𝐾 is sufficiently small, so that profit-motivated investors
are needed to ensure that all firms in the economy are able to receive
financing.23

There is an active debate about how to best capture preferences for
ESG investments, both from a normative and positive perspective, in
particular regarding the question whether such investors are primarily
impact oriented or simply obtain a warm glow from owning “green
firms.”

Theoretically,  if  retail  investors  behaved  like  the  self-interested
homo  oeconomicus,  they  would  understand  that  the impact of  their
(infinitesimally) small investment on firm decisions and therefore ag-
gregate emissions is zero and there would be no demand for sustainable
investment products.24 Thus, an increased concern about externalities
alone,  say  due  to  global  warming,  is  not  sufficient  to  explain  the
large  growth  of  sustainable  investment  products.  Indeed Bonnefon
et  al. (2019)  or Heeb  et  al. (2023)  find  micro-level  evidence  for
preferences that depart from pure self-interest. Their results are most

22 The  minimum  standard  is  equivalent  to  a  tax  when  tax  receipts  are
rebated back to firms in lump-sum fashion. Hence, tax rebates do not change
the main result that first-best cannot be achieved for 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵.
23 See the proof of Proposition 3 for the exact condition.
24 See Result 1 in Oehmke and Opp (forthcoming) taking the number of
investors  to  infinity.  Considerations  for  impact  would  either  require  size
or  effective  coordination,  see  Corollaries  6  and  7  in Oehmke  and  Opp
(forthcoming), which is impossible to achieve for retail investors.

6 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

consistent  with  non-consequentialist  preferences,  in  which  investors
receive  a  non-pecuniary  dividend  from  owning  cleaner  firms.  (We
consider robustness of our results under consequentialist preferences
in Appendix C.)

Based on these observations, we consider the polar opposite of homo
oeconomicus preferences for investors with sustainability concerns in
that households experience a warm-glow boost 𝑤 per unit of investment
when  owning  firms  with  a  sustainability  label.  The  assumption  that
households derive their warm glow through the respective classification
can be motivated by retail investors’ lack of information or excessive
complexity associated with a more detailed assessment. Our analysis
both considers the case when the sustainability label is provided by the
market and when this label is regulated by the taxonomy. The warm
glow implies that households are willing to accept a reduction of the
financial return by 𝑤, consistent with evidence by Riedl and Smeets
(2017). We allow for heterogeneity in the strength of the sustainability
concerns across households. That is, the warm-glow for household 𝑗,
𝑤𝑗 , is drawn from the support [0, 𝑤] with density 𝑓 (𝑤) and CDF 𝐹 (𝑤).
As in Broccardo et al., 2022, we view the warm-glow purely as a
decisional utility. As the planner’s objective remains unaffected com-
pared to our benchmark economy, see (1), our analysis purely focuses
on the real effects of sustainable investing and the taxonomy of the
sustainability label.25 We now consider these welfare effects in two set-
tings. First, we consider the setting where the private market, in terms
of  intermediaries  (or  firms),  provide  the  label.  Second,  we  consider
a setting where the government restricts the use of the sustainability
label.

3.2.  Market equilibrium

Following the structure of our equilibrium analysis in the bench-
mark economy, we initially analyze the behavior of firms and house-
holds given a minimum production standard 𝜃𝑚 and a “sustainability”
≥ 𝜃𝑚 that  determines  the  sustainability  label  for  in-
standard 𝜃𝑠
vestments.  One  key  outcome  variable  is  the  return  subsidy 𝛥𝑟,  the
greenium,  that  is  associated  with  a  given  sustainability  label 𝜃𝑠.  We
will  endogenize  the  laissez-faire  standard  of  the  ESG  label  at  the
very end of this Section. Section 3.3 discusses how a planner would
optimally set the standard for sustainable investments (in conjunction
with environmental policy).

The presence of sustainability-oriented investors implies the follow-
ing adjustments to the equilibrium Definition 1. Equilibrium condition
1a) is still valid, but firms now have the non-trivial choice of producing
at the minimum standard 𝜃𝑚 or meeting the costlier sustainability stan-
dard 𝜃𝑠 to obtain a return subsidy 𝛥𝑟. Investor optimality, equilibrium
condition  1(b),  now  implies  that  household  investor 𝑗 invests  in  a
≥ 𝛥𝑟. Finally, the market clearing
“sustainable” fund if and only if 𝑤𝑗
condition requires that the supply of financing directed to firms with a
ESG label, 𝐾 (1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟)), equals the demand for external financing by
firms opting to meet the standard 𝜃𝑠.

Since investors with sustainability concerns do not have sufficient
capital to finance all firms in the economy (cf. the condition in the proof
of Proposition 3), the marginal firm in the economy always produces
at the minimum standard 𝜃𝑚 and raises financing at the storage rate
𝑟0 = 0. Hence, conditional on aggregate output 𝑞, the payoffs of firms
operating at the minimum standard are as in the benchmark economy,
see (8).

Now, if a firm wanted to raise sustainable financing at a subsidized
rate 𝑟0 − 𝛥𝑟,  it  would  optimally  choose  to  just  meet  the  required

25 If  instead  the  warm  glow  was  part  of  the  objective  function,  a
sustainability label would be trivially beneficial, even absent any real effect.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

threshold 𝜃𝑠.26 Following similar steps as for the derivation of (8), the
entrepreneur’s payoff would be

)

(𝜃𝑠

𝑈𝑖

=

𝐵
𝛥𝑝

𝐴𝑘𝑠 (𝑞) ,

(15)

1−𝛥𝑟
𝐵
𝛥𝑝 −[𝑃 (𝑞)−𝑐(𝜃𝑠)(1−𝛥𝑟)]

can be interpreted as the outside
where 𝑘𝑠 (𝑞) ∶=
financing multiplier for firms with a sustainability label which incor-
) >
porates both the return subsidy 𝛥𝑟 and the production cost 𝑐 (𝜃𝑠
𝑐(𝜃𝑚).

We  now  obtain  the  following  useful  Lemma  regarding  aggregate

production.

Lemma 1. Regardless of whether some firms choose to meet the sustainabil-
ity standard 𝜃𝑠, aggregate output 𝑞∗ is identical to the benchmark economy,
see  characterization  in Proposition  1.  The  equilibrium  outside  financing
multiplier of all firms is 𝑘 (𝑞) =

1
𝐵
𝛥𝑝 −[𝑃 (𝑞)−𝑐(𝜃𝑚)]
In the interesting case in which a fraction of firms produces sustain-
ably, the logic for Lemma 1 is as follows.27 Optimality of firms’ choices
requires that the payoffs of sustainable firms and unsustainable firms
be equalized.28 Comparing the respective payoffs in (8) and (15), then
implies that the outside financing multiplier must be the same for all
firms, i.e., firms’ optimal choices imply the equilibrium condition

.

(𝑞∗)

= 𝑘 (𝑞∗) ≡ 𝑘∗.

𝑘𝑠

(16)

Now, given that all firms have the same outside financing multiplier
as in the benchmark economy, aggregate output is also identical to the
one in the benchmark economy.

To determine the share of output that is produced sustainably, 𝜔, we
first solve for the equilibrium financing subsidy 𝛥𝑟∗ that just outweighs
the production cost differential 𝛥𝑐 ∶= 𝑐 (𝜃𝑠
) > 0. Rearranging
the equilibrium condition (16) yields
𝛥𝑟∗ =

− 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

(17)

)

.

𝛥𝑐
𝑃 (𝑞∗) − 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

+ 𝛥𝑐

Given 𝛥𝑟∗, we can now characterize the composition of production.

Proposition 3 (The Sustainability Subsidy and the Composition of Produc-
tion).

Given 𝜃𝑚 and 𝜃𝑠, total sustainable output is given by:

𝑠 = 𝐾[1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗)
𝑞∗
]

𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

𝑘∗
) 𝑘∗ − 1

.

The equilibrium share of sustainable output, 𝜔∗ ∶=

𝜔∗ =

𝑞∗
𝑠
min { ̄𝑞 , 𝐴𝑘∗}

< 1.

𝑞∗
𝑞∗ , satisfies
𝑠

(18)

(19)

Proposition 3 highlights that sustainable output, 𝑞∗

𝑠 , is the product
of the equilibrium supply of sustainable capital, 𝐾[1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗)], and a
term that reflects leverage as well as the cost of sustainable production.
While the distribution of investor preferences 𝐹 and the sustainability
threshold 𝜃𝑠 do not affect aggregate output 𝑞∗, they have compositional
implications  for  production,  i.e.,  the  fraction  of  firms  that  produce
sustainably versus the ones that produce at the minimum standard. This
characterization yields unambiguous comparative statics, which shed
more light on the underlying economic forces.

We  first  analyze  the  effect  of  a  trend  in  ESG  demand  by  retail

investors.

26 Since exceeding 𝜃𝑠 only results in higher production costs, but entails no
benefits, it is optimal to not exceed the threshold.
27 If no firm produces sustainably, then all firms just raise financing like in
the benchmark economy and the result immediately follows.
28 Producing at threshold 𝜃𝑠 cannot results in lower payoffs since all firms
have  the  option  to  produce  at  the  minimum  standard 𝜃𝑚.  It  cannot  result
in  higher  payoffs  either  since  all  firms  would  otherwise  want  to  produce
sustainably (but there is not enough capital to do so).

7 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Corollary 3. An increase in the amount of capital held by investors with
sustainability concerns 𝐾 or a First-Order Stochastic Dominance shift in
𝐹 (𝑤) increase the share of sustainable investment 𝜔∗, while the financing
subsidy 𝛥𝑟∗ remains unchanged.

Intuitively, if ceteris paribus there is a greater supply of sustain-
able capital, this results in a greater share of sustainable investment.
Still the financing subsidy 𝛥𝑟∗ remains unchanged, as in equilibrium
this is pinned down by firms’ endogenous decision to become more
sustainable and the resulting indifference condition (17).

Moreover, we analyze the effects of the sustainability standard 𝜃𝑠.

Corollary 4. An increase in the sustainability standard 𝜃𝑠 decreases the
share of sustainable investment 𝜔∗ and increases the equilibrium financing
subsidy 𝛥𝑟∗.  If 𝜃𝑠 is  too  stringent,  so  that 𝛥𝑟∗ > ̄𝑤,  no  firm  produces
sustainably.

While a higher sustainability standard does not have an effect on
aggregate output 𝑞∗ (see Lemma 1), it increases the cost differential
𝛥𝑐 for producing sustainably relative to the minimum standard. This
higher cost differential, in turn, requires the capital cost subsidy for
sustainable firms to go up, so as to keep sustainable production equally
attractive, see (17). The required increase in the subsidy needs to be
paid by households and, hence, reduces the attractiveness of the ESG
fund for all households. As a result, previously marginal households
no longer invest sustainably. This comparative statics highlights a key
trade-off that a regulator is facing in our upcoming normative analysis
in Section 3.3. While increasing the sustainability cutoff reduces the
negative  externalities  of  sustainable  firms,  it  reduces  the  fraction  of
firms that choose to produce sustainably.

The laissez-faire standard for sustainable investments. Before analyzing
the planner’s optimization, we consider as a benchmark, a setting in
which competitive intermediaries indexed by 𝑗 sell funds with a sustain-
ability label to retail investors.29 Given fund 𝑗’s cutoff for sustainability
𝜃𝑗
𝑠 are eligible for the sustainability label of
𝑠 , all firms 𝑖 with 𝜃𝑖
fund 𝑗 ∈ {1, 2, … , 𝑁}.30 We now determine the resulting laissez-faire
sustainability standard 𝜃𝑀
𝑠

that all intermediaries choose.

≥ 𝜃𝑗

Proposition 4 (Greenwashing). In a laissez-faire equilibrium, all intermedi-
aries choose the lowest possible threshold for the sustainability label, i.e., ∀𝑗,
𝜃𝑗
𝑠 = 𝜃𝑚. The resulting greenium for sustainable firms is 𝛥𝑟 = 0.
𝑠 = 𝜃𝑀
The argument for why the market cannot sustain a “real” sustain-
able  fund  is  immediate,  so  that  we  cover  it  in  the  main  text.  If  a
real  sustainable  fund 𝑗 required  a  standard 𝜃𝑗
𝑠 >  𝜃𝑚,  it  would  have
to  compensate  firms  for  incremental  costs 𝑐(𝜃𝑠) − 𝑐(𝜃𝑚) > 0.  This,
in  turn  means  that  fund  investors  would  need  to  accept  a  strictly
lower return on their investment, i.e., 𝛥𝑟  > 0. However, as long as
another fund 𝑘 offers an investment product with a sustainability label
at  a  lower  return  discount,  warm-glow  investors  would  flock  to  the
latter, undermining the viability of the “real” sustainable fund. This
race  to  the  bottom  ends  when  all  funds  choose  the  lowest  possible
sustainability standard for firms, i.e., the regulatory minimum standard
(greenwashing).31 Thus,  the  lack  of  a  greenium  in  equilibrium  does

29 Our  analysis,  thus,  abstracts  from  company-level  ESG  ratings,  which
are theoretically analyzed by Azarmsa and Shapiro (2023). In their model,
greenwashing by firms may be detected by a ESG rater.
30 We note that the interpretation in terms of intermediaries is solely made
for expositional reasons. Formally, the results are identical if firms directly
seek funding with a self-designated ESG label, i.e., a fund solely consists of
one firm.
31 This logic is not impacted by the market structure for intermediaries. If
there were instead a monopolistic supplier of sustainable funds, there would
still be zero impact with 𝜃𝑠 = 𝜃𝑚, but the fund would itself pocket a fee 𝜓 > 0.
In particular, the fund would choose its optimal management fee 𝜓 ∗ as to
maximize its revenues 𝜓[1 −𝐹 (𝜓)] resulting in equilibrium “sustainable capital”
of size 𝐾[1 − 𝐹 (𝜓 ∗)].

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

not  necessarily  rule  out  that  a  significant  fraction  of  investors  has
preferences for sustainability. We note that this result can even emerge
under consequentialist preferences provided that the marginal utility
from impact is sufficiently low, see Lemma C.1 in Appendix C.32

We  now  analyze  whether  and  how  a  regulatory  taxonomy  can

ensure a greenium, which is necessary to create real effects.

3.3.  A taxonomy for ESG investments

We stipulate that the planner can set a lower standard 𝜃𝑠 > 𝜃𝑚 that
any sustainable investment must satisfy, thereby preventing the “race
to the bottom,” see Proposition 4. This restriction is consistent with
actual EU regulation: According to the July 2022 Article 9 guidance by
the European Commission, a ESG fund is prohibited from investing in
any firm that is not considered sustainable by the EU taxonomy.

We now analyze first when it is optimal to introduce a sustainability
classification  for  investments 𝜃𝑠.  Based  on  the  extended  equilibrium
characterization in Proposition 3, we can rewrite the planner’s objective
function (1) as follows:

𝑞∗

)

)

(20)

0
+𝑞∗
𝑠

[𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

𝛺 = ∫

𝑃 (𝑞)𝑑 𝑞 − 𝑞∗ [𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
) (𝜌(𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚) −
(𝜃𝑠

]
+ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚)
)]) ,
− 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
where we make the dependence on 𝜃𝑠 explicit and exploit the fact that
firms optimally either choose 𝜃𝑚 or 𝜃𝑠. The first line in (20) captures
the known baseline welfare if all investment were non-sustainable (cf.
expression (1)).  The  second  line  captures  the  incremental  effect  of
sustainable output with quantity 𝑞∗
𝑠

(𝜃𝑠
As  total  output 𝑞∗ does  not  depend  on 𝜃𝑠,  changes  in 𝜃𝑠 only
affect  the  social  planner’s  objective  through  the  second  term.  As  a
result, the planner’s program reduces to that of maximizing the product
captures the incremental benefit per unit of
of 𝑞∗
output, trading off the reduction of the externality with the increase in
cost,
)
𝑣 (𝜃𝑠

∶= 𝜌(𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚) −

where 𝑣 (𝜃𝑠

− 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

𝑠 𝑣 (𝜃𝑠

[𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

(21)

)] .

)
.

)

)

)

When is it optimal to introduce a taxonomy? Note that 𝑣 (𝜃𝑠
is maxi-
mized for 𝜃𝑠 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, see (2), which follows directly from the first-order
condition 𝑣′ (𝜃𝑠

= 0. We then obtain

)

)

Proposition 5 (Optimality of a Taxonomy).The introduction of a sustain-
≥ 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and strictly
able investment taxonomy is strictly suboptimal if 𝜃𝑚
optimal if 𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

We note that Proposition 5 holds irrespective of whether the min-
imum standard is chosen optimally or results from an environmental
policy  failure.  As  one  would  expect  if  environmental  regulation  is
sufficiently lax, as e.g., argued by Tirole (2012), a taxonomy increases
welfare  by  mitigating  the  effects  of  environmental  policy  failure.  In
≥
contrast, if the minimum standard 𝜃𝑚 is already very stringent, 𝜃𝑚
𝜃𝐹 𝐵,  the  incremental  benefit  of  introducing  an  even  more  stringent
classification for sustainable investments is negative, 𝑣 (𝜃𝑠
) < 0, for
all 𝜃𝑠 >  𝜃𝑚.  Hence,  the  regulator  should  not  introduce  a  category
for  sustainable  investments.  While  even  in  this  case  the  availability
of sustainable investment opportunities (and the ensuing warm-glow)
would attract investors and thereby lead to subsidized capital costs for
sustainable firms, it would induce a fraction of firms to overinvest in
sustainability from a welfare perspective.33

The first part of Proposition 5 thus qualifies the notion of a general
social desirability of an ESG-classification of investment funds. Even

32 We  thank  an  anonymous  referee  and  Jean  Tirole  for  suggesting  this
extension.
33 Recall that the social planner’s objective only accounts for real effects,
but not investors’ warm-glow perception.

8 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

when such investment opportunities meet with positive demand, this
could represent “too much of a good thing.”

If 𝜃𝑚 is set optimally, we immediately obtain the following result as

a Corollary to Propositions 2 and 5.

Corollary 5. Under optimal environmental regulation, a taxonomy for
sustainable investments increases welfare if and only if 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵.

That is, the introduction of a taxonomy for sustainable investments
can only increase welfare on top of optimal environmental regulation if
lack of financing is a source of a social inefficiency. Intuitively, if lack
of financing is not a concern, the regulator can simply choose stricter
environmental regulation for all firms (without having to worry about
financial constraints). This intuition for the primacy of environmental
regulation extends to the case of consequentialist investor preferences
(as long as the planner only cares about real effects), see Appendix C.
Moreover,  we  can  interpret  this  result  in  the  cross-section  of

economies.

Corollary 6. In an economy where environmental policy (𝜃𝑚) is optimally
chosen, the additional introduction of a sustainable investment taxonomy is
more likely to be beneficial if, ceteris paribus, firms’ internal funds are more
limited (lower 𝐴) or the agency problem vis-à -vis external investors is more
severe (higher 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝).

Hence, under optimal environmental policy the introduction of a
sustainable investment category is more likely to be socially beneficial
when (lack of) financial development or the (mal-)functioning of the
legal system sufficiently limit internal funding and raise the costs of
external financing. For a developed financial system, as prevailing in
the European Union, this would thus seem less likely.

Optimal stringency of the taxonomy. We now characterize the optimal
stringency of the sustainability standard when the taxonomy improves
welfare as 𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. This could either be because environmental policy
is inefficiently lax due to environmental policy failures or internal funds
are sufficiently limited.

Proposition 6 (Optimal Stringency of Taxonomy). Suppose that 𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵,
so that it is strictly optimal to introduce a sustainable investment category.
Then the optimal threshold, ̂𝜃𝑠, satisfies
𝜕 ln 𝑣 (𝜃𝑠
𝜕 𝜃𝑠

(𝜃𝑠

(22)

> 0,

=

)

)

𝜕 ln 𝑞∗
𝑠
𝜕 𝜃𝑠
so that 𝜃𝑚 < ̂𝜃𝑠 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|

(𝜃𝑠

Similar to the pricing decision of a monopolist, the optimal calibra-
tion of ̂𝜃𝑠 can be expressed in terms of (semi)-elasticities: Ignoring the
)
effect on the supply of sustainable capital 𝑞∗
, it would be optimal
𝑠
=  0 or equivalently ̂𝜃𝑠 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. However, because the
to set
planner additionally needs to account for the downward sloping supply
|
> 0, see Corollary 4, the optimal
of sustainable capital, i.e.,
|
|
|
choice features 𝑣′( ̂𝜃𝑠) > 0, so that ̂𝜃𝑠 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

𝜕 ln 𝑞∗
𝑠 (𝜃𝑠)
𝜕 𝜃𝑠

𝜕 ln 𝑣(𝜃𝑠)
𝜕 𝜃𝑠

Intuitively, investor preferences are a key determinant of the supply
elasticity.  As  investor  preferences  become  more  sustainable,  in  the
sense of a monotone hazard rate shift in 𝐹 (𝑤), the feedback effect on
supply becomes dampened so that the regulator optimally increases ̂𝜃𝑠.
We conclude this section with a brief discussion of the properties
of the optimal policy under the joint optimization of 𝜃𝑚 and 𝜃𝑠. We
denote the respective optimizers as ̂𝜃𝑚 and ̂𝜃𝑠. Since it is suboptimal
to  use  the  second  tool  of  a  sustainable  investment  classification  if
𝐴 ≥ 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, by Corollary 5, the planner problem is akin to the one in
the benchmark economy (when the planner could only avail herself to
the one tool of the minimum standard). That is, the calibration of the
optimum minimum standard is characterized by Proposition 2 and the
minimum standard is, thus, given by ̂𝜃𝑚 = ̃𝜃𝑚, (see Fig. 2 for 𝐴 ≥ 𝐴𝐹 𝐵).
Preferences for sustainable investing do not affect optimal policy.

( ̂𝜃𝑚, ̂𝜃𝑠
)
Fig. 2.  Jointly optimal policy
if the planner can both flexibly a choose a minimum standard and a taxonomy for
sustainable investments 𝜃𝑠 > 𝜃𝑚. For 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 , ̂𝜃𝑚 < ̃𝜃𝑚 < ̂𝜃𝑠. For 𝐴 ≥ 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 , we obtain
that ̂𝜃𝑚 = ̃𝜃𝑚 and no taxonomy for investments is introduced.

)
. The graph plots the optimal choice

( ̂𝜃𝑚, ̂𝜃𝑠

)

)

)

In  contrast,  if 𝐴  <  𝐴𝐹 𝐵,  it  is  optimal  to  introduce  the  sustain-
able  investments  category  by Corollary  5.  Recall  that,  under  opti-
mal  regulation  with  a  minimum  standard  only,  see Proposition  2,
the marginal consumer valuation exceeds the marginal social cost of
production (including externalities), i.e., 𝑃 (𝑞∗) > 𝑐 ( ̃𝜃𝑚
)
+ 𝜌 (𝜃max − ̃𝜃𝑚
.
Therefore, ceteris paribus, an output expansion would be welfare en-
hancing.  Equipped  with  the  second  tool  of  a  taxonomy,  it  is  pos-
sible  to  achieve  this  by  setting  the  sustainability  standard  slightly
higher  than  in  the  benchmark  economy, 𝜃𝑠 > ̃𝜃𝑚,  and  then  lower
the  minimal  standard 𝜃𝑚 < ̃𝜃𝑚 until  the  weighted  average  social
]
cost, (1 − 𝜔)
+ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚)
matches
the  one  in  the  benchmark  economy.  This  perturbation  always  im-
proves welfare compared to the benchmark economy since it alleviates
underproduction in the economy by lowering the minimum standard.
The optimal calibration of the respective standards, i.e., ̂𝜃𝑠 and ̂𝜃𝑚,
see first-order conditions in Proof of Propositions 5 and 6, is illustrated
in Fig. 2 for an example specification: the optimal minimum standard is
below the one in the benchmark economy ̂𝜃𝑚 < ̃𝜃𝑚 (compare red line for
̂𝜃𝑚 to blue dotted line for ̃𝜃𝑚 for 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵) and the optimal sustainability
standard exceeds the minimum standard of the benchmark economy
(compare green line for ̂𝜃𝑠 to blue dotted line for ̃𝜃𝑚).

]
+ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑠)

+ 𝜔 [𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

[𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

We  finally  note  that  the  possibility  of  setting  a  carbon  tax,  as
discussed in Appendix B, does not affect the validity of Propositions 5
and 6. Intuitively, when 𝐴  >  𝐴𝐹 𝐵, first-best welfare can already be
achieved, see Remark 1, so that sustainable finance is not needed. When
sustainable finance is needed, 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, the optimal carbon tax would
be zero so that only the minimum standard is used as an environmental
policy tool.

4.  Concluding remarks

Greenwashing is regularly mentioned as one of the key impediments
for impact of sustainable finance. In response, regulators around the
world  are  in  the  process  of  developing  taxonomies  for  sustainable
(or ESG) investment products. We show that a regulatory standard in
the form of a taxonomy is necessary to prevent such a “race to the
bottom”  and  is,  hence,  instrumental  to  ensure  a  greenium  and  im-
pact of sustainable finance in the presence of empirically documented
preferences for sustainability. However, is it beneficial to introduce a
classification  for  sustainable  investments  when  a  social  planner  can
optimally choose more direct policy instruments, such as a minimum

9 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

standard or Pigouvian taxes? The answer is non-trivial as the planner
in our model only cares about real effects, but not directly about the
warm glow that households experience when investing sustainably.

Our normative paper highlights two frictions that justify a public
intervention in the form of taxonomy. First and intuitively, if policy
failures render environmental regulation to be too lax, as e.g., argued
by Tirole (2012),  a  taxonomy  can  help  to  partially  mitigate  under-
investment  in  sustainability.  Second,  there  is  a  role  for  harnessing
“sustainable  capital”  even  if  traditional  environmental  tools  can  be
optimally chosen, but this requires financial frictions to prevent the
economy from running at the socially efficient scale when the socially
desirable  minimum  standard  or  tax  on  externalities  is  set.  In  this
case, the sustainable investment classification adds a valuable second
instrument that mitigates the trade-off between achieving higher sus-
tainability for production and generating an inefficient contraction of
economic activity.

Our analysis has normative implications for optimal policy across
countries. Economies with higher financial development, for which fi-
nancial constraints are less relevant, should have stricter environmental
regulation. Then, there is no role for the introduction of a sustainable
investments category unless environmental policy is too lax. In contrast,
for  economies  with  poorer  financial  development,  binding  financial
constraints imply a welfare-enhancing role for sustainable finance even
under optimal environmental policy as subsidies are required to finance
the transition.

Empirical researchers could calibrate a structural model to gauge
whether the two highlighted frictions, financial frictions and environ-
mental policy failure, are sufficiently important in the data to warrant
an intervention via financial regulation. An important first step is to
determine the welfare-optimal environmental policy, which, e.g., in-
corporates measures of the social cost of carbon (Rennert et al., 2022).
Determining such optimal environmental policy (e.g., the size of the
carbon tax) is complex as it needs to account for international leakage,
i.e., shifting of production to other jurisdictions. One interesting aspect
is that while environmental regulation is limited to apply within a juris-
diction,34 the taxonomy for investments could be, in principle, extended
to firms outside of the jurisdiction (e.g., a European ESG fund could
subsidize a Chinese firm). Moreover, while our qualitative model ab-
stracts, for ease of exposition, from firm or industry heterogeneity, such
a quantitative exercise should account for cross-sectional differences in
the relevance of financial constraints, as e.g., documented by Farre-
Mensa  et  al. (2022).  We  believe  that  such  a  calibration  exercise  is
relevant, both from a research and a policy perspective.

More generally, our paper has analyzed the role of financial reg-
ulation  for  supporting  a  sustainable  transition.  We  focused  on  one
particular tool, a taxonomy for sustainable investments. Other regu-
latory initiatives are ongoing, e.g., green monetary policy as studied
in Papoutsi  et  al. (2021),  or  green  capital  requirements  as  studied
in Oehmke and Opp (2022). The analysis of which (combination of)
tools is most impactful is an interesting question for future empirical
and theoretical research. The results of this paper suggest that financial
regulation is only part of the optimal policy mix if “finance” is the root
of the problem. Put differently, absent frictions in the financial sector,
environmental regulation should be at the top of the regulatory pecking
order.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Marcus Matthias Opp reports that financial support was provided by
the  Marianne  and  Marcus  Wallenberg  Foundation  (Project  number:
2021.0122) and Jan Wallanders och Tom Hedelius stiftelse samt Tore
Browaldhs  stiftelse  (Project  number:  Fh23-0015).  Roman  Inderst  re-
ports  that  financial  support  was  provided  by  the  German  Research
Foundation (DFG) and European Research Council (ERC).

Appendix A.  Proofs

If 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

We now turn to the relevant case when 𝑃 (0) > 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

) >  𝑃 (0),  the  production  cost  as-
Proof  of Proposition  1.
sociated  with  the  environmental  minimum  standard  is  so  high  that
profitable production is not even possible at the highest product price
𝑃 (0). Hence, no firm produces, so that aggregate output satisfies 𝑞∗ = 0.
)
. We first want
to show that aggregate output satisfies 𝑞min < 𝑞∗ ≤ ̄𝑞 where ̄𝑞 denotes
the zero-profit output and 𝑞min is the output that can be produced as
internal funds 𝐴 approach zero, i.e.,
0
+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

𝑃 (0) ≤ 𝐵
𝛥𝑝
𝑃 (0) > 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

)
) .

)) if

( 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

𝑞min =

(A.1)

𝑃 −1

{

)

The  lower  bound  follows  from  the  fact  that  as  long  as 𝑃 (𝑞) >
+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
𝐵
each individual firm’s borrowing constraint would not bind,
𝛥𝑝
see (IC) and (IR). The upper bound ̄𝑞 follows from the fact that for any
𝑞 > ̄𝑞 firms would earn a lower return than their outside option 𝑟0 = 0.
We now turn to the question whether output ̄𝑞 is feasible in the
presence of financial constraints. Suppose that aggregate output is at
̄𝑞,  then  the  associated  output  capacity  multiplier  in (7) is 𝑘∗ = 𝛥𝑝
.
𝐵
Each individual firm takes this multiplier as given. We now distinguish
between two cases.

Case 1) If 𝐴 < ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝, then even if all firms were to lever up to the
), aggregate output

maximum (using the candidate multiplier 𝑘∗ = 𝛥𝑝
𝐵
of ̄𝑞 would not be feasible. Hence, 𝑞∗ is the unique solution to

𝑞 = 𝐴𝑘 (𝑞) .

Uniqueness follows from the fact that 𝑘 (𝑞) is strictly decreasing and
continuous in 𝑞 and 𝐴𝑘 (𝑞min

) > 0.

Case 2) If 𝐴 ≥ ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝, it is feasible to produce aggregate output of
̄𝑞. In this case, at 𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞 firms are indifferent between investing and the
storage technology. ■

Lemma A.1 (No Shirking). A sufficient condition to rule out shirking in
equilibrium is:
− 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
𝐵
< 𝑃 (𝑞min
𝛥𝑝
𝛥𝑝
where 𝑞min is given by (A.1).

𝑃 (𝑞min

(A.2)

−

)

)

)

,

Proof of Lemma A.1. Suppose the entrepreneur shirks in equilibrium,
then one only needs to consider the investors’ IR constraint:
(1 − 𝛥𝑝) 𝐷𝑖

) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐴𝑖.

≥ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

(IR∗)

Binding (IR∗) now implies that the face value of debt is set to35:

.

(A.3)

Roman Inderst: Formal analysis, Writing. Marcus M. Opp: Formal

analysis, Writing.

𝐷𝑖 =

𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐴
1 − 𝛥𝑝

34 A  Carbon-Border-Adjustment-Tax  can  mitigate  such  carbon  leakage  for
imported goods.

35 Because the manager is protected by limited liability, i.e., 𝐷𝑖
≤ 𝑃 (𝑞), there
may be an upper bound on the feasible quantity 𝑞𝑖, but this is irrelevant for
our argument.

10 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

Then,  the  manager’s  payoff,  including  the  payoff  from  the  storage
technology

)
, is:

(𝐴 − 𝐴𝑖
[

𝑈𝑖 = (1 − 𝛥𝑝)

𝑞𝑖𝑃 (𝑞) −

+ 𝐵 𝑞𝑖 +

(𝐴 − 𝐴𝑖

)

𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

]

) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐴𝑖
1 − 𝛥𝑝
+ 𝐵]
)

+ 𝐴.

= 𝑞𝑖

[
(1 − 𝛥𝑝) 𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

If (A.2) holds, then (1 − 𝛥𝑝) 𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

+ 𝐵  < 0 irrespective of
the product price 𝑃 (since 𝑃 is highest for 𝑞min). As a result, the en-
trepreneur’s utility would be below the payoff received from investing
in the storage technology, 𝑈𝑖 < 𝐴, whenever 𝑞𝑖 > 0. Therefore, (A.2)
rules out shirking in equilibrium. ■

)

Proof  of Corollary  1. We  distinguish  based  on  whether  aggregate
output is constrained by financial frictions. If output is unconstrained,
)
then 𝑃 (𝑞∗) = 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
, see (9). An increase in 𝐴 has no effect on 𝑞∗. An
increase in 𝜃𝑚 and concomitant increase in 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
decreases aggregate
output 𝑞∗ because 𝑃 ′(𝑞) < 0.

)

−

)])−1

( 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

[𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

Suppose next that aggregate output is constrained by financial fric-
tions. Then, Proposition 1 implies that 𝑞∗ is determined from 𝐴𝑘 (𝑞) = 𝑞,
.  Using  the  implicit  function
where 𝑘 (𝑞) =
theorem, we obtain that
𝜕 𝑞∗
𝑘 (𝑞)
𝜕 𝐴
1 − 𝐴𝑘′ (𝑞)
where  the  sign  follows  from 𝑘′ (𝑞) < 0 (so  that  the  denominator  is
positive) and 𝑘 (𝑞) > 0. Analogously, we obtain

(A.4)

> 0,

=

𝐴 𝜕 𝑘(𝑞)
𝜕 𝜃𝑚
1 − 𝐴𝑘′ (𝑞)

=

< 0,

𝜕 𝑞∗
𝜕 𝜃𝑚
where the negative sign of the numerator, 𝜕 𝑘(𝑞)
𝜕 𝜃𝑚
)
𝑐′ (𝜃𝑚
𝜕 𝑘 (𝑞)
𝜕 𝜃𝑚
[𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

)])2

= −

< 0.

−

( 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

(A.5)

< 0, follows from

■

+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

)

If 𝑃 (0) ≤ 𝐵
Proof of Corollary 2.
the result is immediate.
𝛥𝑝
Otherwise,  the  proof  of Proposition  1 implies  that  for  any 𝐴  > 0,
(𝑞min, ̄𝑞]
aggregate output satisfies 𝑞∗ > 𝑞min so that 𝑞∗ ∈
=
)
𝐵
. Hence, for any 𝐴 > 0, we obtain that
𝛥𝑝
)
= 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝 + 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
. Therefore, the capacity multiplier is

and 𝑃 ( ̄𝑞) = 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

with 𝑃 (𝑞min

)

)

)

+ 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
𝑃 (𝑞∗) < 𝑃 (𝑞min
finite.

We now turn to the rents. If 𝐴 ≥ ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝, equilibrium output satisfies
𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞 and 𝑃 (𝑞∗)  = 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
)
.  The  firm  is  then  indifferent  between
investing its own funds productively or using the storage technology,
𝑖 = 𝐴. This follows from inserting the equilibrium multiplier
so that 𝑈 ∗
𝑘∗ = 𝛥𝑝
into 𝑈 ∗
𝑖
𝐵

If 𝐴  <  ̄𝑞 𝐵∕𝛥𝑝, equilibrium output satisfies 𝑞∗ <  ̄𝑞 so that a firm
would  strictly  prefer  to  expand  output.  Strictly  positive  firm  rents,
𝑖 > 𝐴, follow from inserting the equilibrium multiplier 𝑘∗ > 𝛥𝑝
𝑈 ∗
into
𝑈 ∗
𝑖

in (8). ■

in (8).

𝐵

Proof of Proposition 2. Recall that first-best requires that all firms
choose  the  sustainability  level 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and  aggregate  output  be  at 𝑞𝐹 𝐵.
The sustainability choice of 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 can only be ensured by setting the
minimum standard to 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. If output is unconstrained by financial
frictions and 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, it is immediate from the then prevailing zero-
profit condition, 𝑃 (𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞) = 𝑐(𝜃𝐹 𝐵), that output is socially excessive,
𝑞∗ > 𝑞𝐹 𝐵. It is thus necessary that aggregate output be constrained by
financial frictions to achieve first-best.

We  now  prove  that  for  some 𝐴 ∈

first-best  can
be  achieved  as  long  as 𝐵
≥ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵),  i.e.,  Condition (14)
𝛥𝑝
holds.  By Proposition  1,  where  we  now  set 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵,  output  is

[
0, ̄𝑞 (𝜃𝐹 𝐵

) 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

]

Fig. A.3.  Discontinuity of policy function. The black graph plots welfare 𝛺 ( 𝜃𝑚|
𝐴)
|
as a function of the minimum standard 𝜃𝑚 conditional on internal funds 𝐴 = ̄𝐴 for which
the planner is indifferent between causing financial constraints or not. The function has
two global maxima. The red dashed line plots the welfare function in the absence of
financial constraints, i.e., internal funds approaching infinity.

)]

[𝑞min

(𝜃𝐹 𝐵

[
0, ̄𝑞 (𝜃𝐹 𝐵

characterized by the fixed point (10), from which 𝑞∗ is a continuous,
]
) 𝐵
strictly increasing function of 𝐴 over the domain 𝐴 ∈
𝛥𝑝
(𝜃𝐹 𝐵
) , ̄𝑞 (𝜃𝐹 𝐵
with range
. Note that we have made explicit the
dependency on 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 also for 𝑞min, as defined in (A.1). Given continuity
and strict monotonicity as well as ̄𝑞 (𝜃𝐹 𝐵
) > 𝑞𝐹 𝐵, it thus suffices that
)
) < 𝑞𝐹 𝐵 = 𝑃 −1 (𝑐(𝜃𝐹 𝐵) + 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵)
. If 𝑞min = 0, the result
𝑞min
is immediate since first-best output 𝑞𝐹 𝐵 is by Assumption (A1) positive.
, then 𝑞min <
If the minimum output satisfies 𝑞min = 𝑃 −1
𝑞𝐹 𝐵 if and only if 𝐵

> 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵), which is condition (14).

(
𝑐 (𝜃𝐹 𝐵

Suppose  now  that,  at  the  optimally  chosen  minimum  standard,
aggregate  output  is  constrained  by  financial  frictions.  Consider  the
first-order condition (13) and notably the term
𝐺 = 𝑃 (𝑞∗)

− 𝜌 (𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚

− 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

+ 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

(A.6)

) ,

𝛥𝑝

)

)

)

which is zero at first-best and 𝐴 = 𝐴𝐹 𝐵. We prove now by contradiction
that when 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, then ̃𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. Assume thus that 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 but
≤ 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. Then, from 𝜌 − 𝑐′ ( ̃𝜃𝑚
) ≥ 0, the first-order condition requires
̃𝜃𝑚
that 𝐺 ≥ 0. But compared to 𝐴 = 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 and 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, now 𝑞∗ > 𝑞𝐹 𝐵 so that
𝑃 (𝑞∗) is strictly lower, while 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
)
is weakly higher (and
strictly so if ̃𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵). This together implies 𝐺 < 0, a contradiction.
The case where 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 and now ̃𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 is analogous.
strained, 𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞 (𝜃𝑚
at the optimum ̃𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

If  instead,  at  the  optimal  standard,  aggregate  output  is  not  con-
is always negative, so that

, 𝐺 =  −𝜌 (𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚
)

+𝜌 (𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚

This concludes the proof. We additionally shed light on the discon-

)

)

tinuity of the policy function in Fig. 1.

Let

̄𝐴 denote the value of 𝐴 for which the planner is indifferent
between setting a low value of the minimum standard lim𝐴→ ̄𝐴− ̃𝜃𝑚 (so
that financial constraints constrain output 𝑞∗ <  ̄𝑞) or setting a high
value  of  the  minimum  standard ̄𝜃𝑚 so  that  aggregate  output  is  not
)
constrained by financial constraints and given by 𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞 ( ̄𝜃𝑚
. (Recall
that ̄𝑞 is a strictly decreasing function of 𝜃𝑚). Formally, the objective
function 𝛺 ( 𝜃𝑚|
|

has two global maxima for 𝐴 = ̄𝐴 (see Fig. A.3).

𝐴)

Proof of Lemma 1. See main text. ■

Proof of Proposition 3. To provide 𝑞∗
each  firm  demands 𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

𝑠 units of sustainable output,
) 𝐴𝑘∗ − 𝐴 of  capital  from  outside  investors

11 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

while coinvesting 𝐴. Given 𝛥𝑟∗, the total volume of supplied sustainable
capital  is 𝐾 (1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗)).  The  equalization  of  demand  and  supply  in
equilibrium thus implies that
𝑐 (𝜃𝑠
Solving for 𝐴 yields the aggregate amount of internal funds provided
by all sustainable firms in equilibrium,

) 𝐴𝑘∗ − 𝐴 = 𝐾 (

1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗))

.

𝐴𝑠 =

𝐾 (1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗))
) 𝑘∗ − 1
𝑐 (𝜃𝑠
Therefore, sustainable output, 𝑞∗
𝑠 = 𝐾 (
𝑞∗

1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗))

𝑘∗
) 𝑘∗ − 1

𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

𝑠 = 𝐴𝑠𝑘∗, is given by
,

(A.7)

which  restates (18).  Since  aggregate  output  is  given  by 𝑞∗ =  min
{ ̄𝑞 , 𝐴𝑘∗} (by Proposition 1 , respectively Lemma 1) and total sustainable
output is given by (18), the ratio is given by (19).

The condition on the short supply of sustainable capital requires that

𝜔∗ < 1, i.e.,
𝐾 (

1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗))

𝑘∗
) 𝑘∗ − 1

𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

< min

{ ̄𝑞 , 𝐴𝑘∗} ,

which is always satisfied if the amount of capital owned by investors
with sustainability preferences, 𝐾, is sufficiently small.

.

)

)

)

−

)}]

− min

𝑃 (𝑞min

(1 − ̄𝑤), 𝑐 (𝜃𝑚

We now adapt Lemma A.1 to account for investors with sustain-
ability preferences. A sufficient condition to rule out shirking in equi-
librium is:
𝐵
𝛥𝑝

[{𝑐 (𝜃𝑠
< 𝑃 (𝑞min
𝛥𝑝
This can be derived by the same steps as in the proof of Lemma A.1,
taking into account that a shirking firm can now also become sustain-
able. To take this into account, we generally denote the firm’s interest
)
rate by 𝑟 (𝜃𝑖
, so that a shirking firm’s
payoff now reads as follows:
)
(1 − 𝛥𝑝) 𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑖
[

and its production cost by 𝑐 (𝜃𝑖

(1 + 𝑟 (𝜃𝑖

𝑈𝑖 = 𝑞𝑖

(A.8)

) + 𝐵]
)
If (A.8) holds, then (1 − 𝛥𝑝) 𝑃 (𝑞) − 𝑐 (𝜃𝑖

+ 𝐴𝑖𝑟 (𝜃𝑖
) 𝑞𝑖(1 + 𝑟 (𝜃𝑖

)
) + 𝐵 < 0 holds
now also regardless of whether the firm produces unsustainably at cost
𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
=  0 or sustainably at cost 𝑐 (𝜃𝑠
with 𝑟 (𝜃𝑚
with the highest
financing subsidy ̄𝑤. ■

+ 𝐴.

)

)

)

)

)

Proof of Corollary 3. The invariance of 𝛥𝑟∗ follows from (17). Equi-
librium output 𝑞∗ and, hence, the multiplier 𝑘∗ are also unaffected by
𝐹 (𝑤) as a result of Proposition 1. A first-order stochastic dominance
shift of the distribution 𝐹 (𝑤) must now decrease 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗) and, hence
increases 𝑞∗

𝑠 . The same holds for an increase in 𝐾. ■

Proof of Corollary 4. We first prove the effect on 𝛥𝑟∗. An increase
in 𝜃𝑠 increases 𝛥𝑐. Differentiating (17) implies that 𝜕 𝛥𝑟∗
> 0, because
𝜕 𝛥𝑐
𝑃 (𝑞∗) − 𝐵
> 0, which follows from (IC). Thus, from (18) 𝑞∗
𝑠 decreases
𝛥𝑝
with 𝛥𝑐 (and thus 𝜃𝑠), so that 𝜔∗ in (19) decreases as well. If 𝛥𝑟∗ > ̄𝑤,
even an investor with the highest warm glow ̄𝑤 would not invest in
sustainable firms, so that no firm would be able to get financing for
producing sustainably.

■

Proof of Proposition 4. See main text. ■

Proof of Propositions 5 and 6. We first consider the optimal choice
of 𝜃𝑠. The social planner’s objective function in (20) reduces to that of
maximizing
) 𝑣 (𝜃𝑠
(𝜃𝑠
) ,
𝑞∗
𝑠
where 𝑣 (𝜃𝑠
)
the  observation  that 𝑣′ (𝜃𝑠
strictly negative for all 𝜃𝑠 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

is given by (21). Proposition 5 follows immediately from
is  strictly  positive  for  all 𝜃𝑠 <  𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and

(A.9)

)

If 𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, the first-order condition for 𝜃𝑠 is given by
𝑣 (𝜃𝑠

) 𝑣′ (𝜃𝑠

(𝜃𝑠

= 0,

)

)

+ 𝑞∗
𝑠

𝜕 𝑞∗
𝑠
𝜕 𝜃𝑠

(A.10)

𝜕 𝑞∗
𝑠
𝜕 𝜃𝑠

)

<
) > 0 at the optimum so
) > 0.

which can be transformed to obtain (22) in Proposition 6, where
0 follows from Corollary 4. As a result 𝑣′ ( ̂𝜃𝑠
that ̂𝜃𝑠 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. Moreover, ̂𝜃𝑠 > 𝜃𝑚 so that 𝑣 ( ̂𝜃𝑠
We now characterize the optimal choice of 𝜃𝑚. Let 𝐶 ∶= (1 − 𝜔)
[𝑐 (𝜃𝑚
]
denote  the  weighted
+ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑚)
average social cost of production (including externalities). Then, the
first-order condition of (20) with respect to the minimum standard can
be stated as:
𝑑 𝑞∗ (𝜃𝑚
𝑑 𝜃𝑚
■

]
+ 𝜌(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑠)

𝜕 𝜔∗ (𝜃𝑚
𝜕 𝜃𝑚

+ 𝜔 [𝑐 (𝜃𝑠

[𝑃 (𝑞∗) − 𝐶]

[𝜌 − 𝑐′ (𝜃𝑚

= 𝑞∗ (1 − 𝜔)

(A.11)

𝑣 (𝜃𝑠

+ 𝑞∗

) .

)]

−

)

)

)

Proof  of Corollary  5. As  the  social  planner  can  now  avail  herself
of  both  instruments,  her  program  is  to  choose 𝜃𝑚 and  potentially  a
sustainable  investment  category  with  threshold 𝜃𝑠 >  𝜃𝑚 so  as  to
maximize 𝛺 in (12). The optimal outcome is denoted by ( ̂𝜃𝑚, ̂𝜃𝑠). We
note first that the derivative with respect to 𝜃𝑠 is identical to that in
the partial problem of Proposition 5, where we took 𝜃𝑚 as given. It
is thus strictly optimal to introduce a sustainable investment category
̂𝜃𝑠 > ̂𝜃𝑚 if ̂𝜃𝑚 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and strictly suboptimal otherwise. It thus remains to
show that, also in the presence of both potential instruments, ̂𝜃𝑚
≥ 𝜃𝐹 𝐵
( ̂𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵) if 𝐴 ≥ 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 (𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵). We show this by contradiction.

Suppose that 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 and suppose, instead that ̂𝜃𝑚

≥ 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. Then,
it would not be optimal to introduce a sustainable investment category
with ̂𝜃𝑠 > ̂𝜃𝑚, in which case we know however from Proposition 2 that
̂𝜃𝑚 = ̃𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, a contradiction.

For 𝐴 = 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 the argument is immediate as ̂𝜃𝑚

≥ 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 achieves the
first best, while 𝛺 is strictly lower for any choice ̂𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, irrespective
of the choice of 𝜃𝑠.

Turning finally to 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, suppose that ̂𝜃𝑚 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, in which case
it would be optimal to choose a threshold ̂𝜃𝑚 < ̂𝜃𝑠 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵. To show that
this is not optimal, it is sufficient to argue that welfare is strictly higher
by setting instead 𝜃𝑚 = ̂𝜃𝑠, without a sustainable investment category.
Denote the thereby realized value by ̃𝛺,

𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠)

̃𝛺 = ∫

0

𝑃 (𝑞)𝑑 𝑞 − 𝜌𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠)

[𝑐 ( ̂𝜃𝑠

)

+ 𝜌(𝜃max − ̂𝜃𝑠)

] ,

where we have set 𝜃𝑚 = ̂𝜃𝑠. Calculating now the difference ̃𝛺 − 𝛺,
this can be decomposed as follows: first, while quantity 𝑞∗
𝑠 is produced
with standard ̂𝜃𝑠, quantity 𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠) − 𝑞∗
𝑠 is now produced with standard
𝜃𝑚 = ̂𝜃𝑠 and no longer with the supposedly optimal minimum standard
̂𝜃𝑚;  second,  total  output  is  reduced  from 𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑚) to 𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠).  With  this
decomposition we have ̃𝛺 − 𝛺 = 𝛥1 + 𝛥2, where
) [𝜌( ̂𝜃𝑠 − ̂𝜃𝑚) −
)]] ,
𝛥1 =
which is strictly positive from ̂𝜃𝑚 < ̂𝜃𝑠 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, and
[𝑐 ( ̂𝜃𝑚
𝛥2 = − ∫

+ 𝜌(𝜃max − ̂𝜃𝑚)

(𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠) − 𝑞∗

− 𝑐 ( ̂𝜃𝑚

[𝑃 (𝑞) −

[𝑐 ( ̂𝜃𝑠

]] 𝑑 𝑞 ,

𝑞∗

)

)

𝑠

𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠)

)

[𝑐 ( ̂𝜃𝑚

+ 𝜌(𝜃max − ̂𝜃𝑚)

which is strictly positive when, at the lower boundary,
𝑃 (𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠)) −
This  follows  by  construction,  as  with 𝐴  >  𝐴𝐹 𝐵 the  marginal  social
≤ 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, and thus also for 𝜃𝑚 =
return is negative at least for all 𝜃𝑚
̂𝜃𝑠 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and the corresponding quantity 𝑞∗( ̂𝜃𝑠). ■

] < 0.

Proof  of Corollary  6. We  prove  that 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 is  strictly  increasing  in
the severity of the agency problem, 𝜉 = 𝐵
. For this recall the def-
𝛥𝑝
inition of 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 from the proof of Proposition 2, which requires that
𝐺 (𝜃𝐹 𝐵, 𝐴𝐹 𝐵
= 0, where we use the definition of the term 𝐺 in (A.6)
and make explicit the dependency on internal funds, while substituting

)

12 

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

first-best for the optimally chosen standard. From this we thus have
that

= −

𝑃 ′(𝑞∗) 𝑑 𝑞∗
𝑑 𝐴𝐹 𝐵
𝑑 𝜉
𝑃 ′(𝑞∗) 𝑑 𝑞∗
𝑑 𝜉
𝑑 𝐴
which uses that 𝑑 𝑞∗
𝑑 𝐴
(using Eq. (10) in Proposition 1, 𝑞∗ = 𝐴𝑘(𝑞∗)). ■

𝑑 𝑞∗∕𝑑 𝜉
𝑑 𝑞∗∕𝑑 𝐴

= −

> 0,

> 0 and 𝑑 𝑞∗∕𝑑 𝜉  < 0 under constrained output

Appendix B.  Pigouvian tax

In this section, we show robustness of our main results to a more
general environmental policy. In particular, we allow the regulator to
also impose a tax 𝜏 ≥ 0 per unit of externality (so that the standard
Pigouvian tax level would be 𝜏 = 𝜌). For the purpose of this extension
only,  denote  the  thus  adjusted  marginal  costs  of  production,  now
including taxes on externalities, by ̃𝑐(𝜃𝑖) = 𝑐(𝜃𝑖) + 𝜏(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑖). Hence,
) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐴, and with
the firm now needs to raise now the amount ̃𝑐 (𝜃𝑖
this modification the incentive and participation constraints, (IC) and
(IR) respectively, remain unchanged, as does the characterization of the
firm’s payoff 𝑈𝑖.

Ignoring  the  minimum  standard,  to  maximize 𝑈𝑖 the  firm  would
choose 𝜃𝑖 so as to minimize ̃𝑐(𝜃𝑖), 𝑐′(𝜃𝑖) = 𝜏. If the respective solution
were above the minimum standard, the latter would be superfluous. On
the other hand, any standard that is implemented by a specific choice
of the tax 𝜏 can be implemented as well by directly imposing this as the
minimum standard. By levying (additionally) a tax, the planner extracts
some of the firm’s funds.

If 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, extracting funds from firms is strictly suboptimal, as
this leads to additional reduction in output. Therefore, the planner only
uses the minimum standard as characterized by Proposition 2.36

In contrast, if 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, the tax allows the planner to limit over-
production. By calibrating the tax accordingly, this allows to achieve
first-best output, 𝑞∗ = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵, while at the same time setting the minimum
standard to 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

Proposition 7 (Minimum Standard and Carbon Tax). Suppose now the
planner can use both a minimum standard and a carbon tax. If condition
holds (14) and 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, first-best welfare cannot be attained. The optimal
carbon  tax  is  zero  and  the  optimal  minimum  standard  and  output  are
characterized by Propositions 1 and 2. Otherwise, first best can be achieved.
If 𝐴 > 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 holds strictly, achieving first-best requires a positive tax 𝜏 > 0
next to the first-best standard 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵.

If (14) holds and 𝐴 ≤ 𝐴𝐹 𝐵, the characteriza-
Proof of Proposition 7.
tion follows immediately from the argument in the main text and from
Proposition 2.

We  now  consider  the  case 𝐴  >  𝐴𝐹 𝐵.  We  now  characterize  the
optimal tax 𝜏 > 0 which, together with 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵, ensures the socially
optimal output 𝑞∗ = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵.

For this suppose first that (14) holds. We write out explicitly the
(implicit) characterization of 𝑞∗ when financial constraints bind, but
using now costs ̃𝑐(𝜃𝑖) = 𝑐(𝜃𝑖) + 𝜏(𝜃max − 𝜃𝑖). When 𝜃𝑚 = 𝜃𝐹 𝐵 and 𝑞∗ = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵
is achieved, it thus must hold that

𝑞𝐹 𝐵 = 𝐴

𝐵
𝛥𝑝

−

[𝑃 (𝑞𝐹 𝐵

)

1
− 𝑐 (𝜃𝐹 𝐵

)

− 𝜏(𝜃max − 𝜃𝐹 𝐵)

] .

(B.12)

Recall that at 𝐴 = 𝐴𝐹 𝐵 this is satisfied when 𝜏 = 0. As the right-
hand side of (B.12) is continuous and strictly increasing in 𝐴 as well as
strictly decreasing in 𝜏, there exists a strictly increasing function 𝜏(𝐴)

36 The  minimum  standard  is  equivalent  to  a  tax  when  tax  receipts  are
rebated back to firms in lump-sum fashion. Hence, tax rebates do not change
the main result that first-best cannot be achieved for 𝐴 < 𝐴𝐹 𝐵.

13 

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

so that 𝑞∗ = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵. Define next 𝐴𝐶 𝑇 = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵𝐵∕𝛥𝑝, where 𝜏(𝐴𝐶 𝑇 )  = 𝜌.
Observe that there 𝑞∗ is also obtained from the now modified zero-
profit output condition for ̄𝑞, 𝑃 (𝑞𝐹 𝐵)  = ̃𝑐(𝜃𝐹 𝐵). Consequently, as we
leave 𝜏 = 𝜌 unchanged for all 𝐴 ≥ 𝐴𝐶 𝑇 the first best is obtained so that
𝑞∗ = ̄𝑞 = 𝑞𝐹 𝐵 (and financial constraints do not bind).

Finally if (14) does not hold, the only difference is that the planner
needs to set a positive tax for all levels of 𝐴. This tax is still given by
(B.12). ■

Incidentally, our results would need to be slightly adjusted when
the planner could only use a carbon tax, but not a minimum standard.
Intuitively, as the tax reduces firms’ financial resources, a carbon tax
alone  could  achieve  first  best  only  if  financial  constraints  are  less
pronounced. Formally, a carbon tax achieves first best if and only if
𝐴 ≥ 𝐴𝐶 𝑇 .

Appendix C.  Consequentialist preferences and Greenwashing

We now discuss robustness of our results when investor preferences
also care about impact 𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚. In particular, we consider preferences
of the following form: 𝑤 + 𝜂 (𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚
for some bounded concave and
twice differentiable function 𝜂 with 𝜂 (0) = 0, e.g., 𝜅
for
some constant 𝜅 > 0. We then obtain the following result:

(
1 − 𝑒−(𝜃𝑠−𝜃𝑚)

)

)

Lemma  C.1 (Robustness  of  Greenwashing). If  the  marginal  utility  from
impact is sufficiently small, 𝜂′ (𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚
for all 𝜃𝑠,
the market equilibrium features greenwashing.

)2 𝑐′ (𝜃𝑠

𝑃 (𝑞∗)− 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

𝑃 (𝑞∗)− 𝐵

𝛥𝑝 +𝛥𝑐

) <

)

(

Proof  of Lemma  C.1. A  “greenwashing”  fund  with 𝜃𝑠 = 𝜃𝑚 will
generate  utility 𝑤 to  the  investor.  Suppose  another  fund  offered  an
“impact” fund requiring all firms to meet the threshold 𝜃𝑠 > 𝜃𝑚. Then,
firm indifference would require a financing subsidy of
𝛥𝑟∗ (𝜃𝑠

=

)

.

𝛥𝑐
𝑃 (𝑞∗) − 𝐵
𝛥𝑝

+ 𝛥𝑐

)

Hence,  investors  in  this  impact  fund  would  get  a  net  utility  of 𝑤 −
𝛥𝑟∗ (𝜃𝑠
+ 𝜂(𝛥𝜃). By optimality of investor choices, such a fund is viable
) > 0 for some 𝜃𝑠 > 𝜃𝑚.
in the market if and only if 𝜂 (𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚
)
− 𝛥𝑟∗ (𝜃𝑠
𝑃 (𝑞∗)− 𝐵
However, if 𝜂′ (𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚
)2 𝑐′ (𝜃𝑠
, the term 𝜂 (𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚
)
𝛥𝑝
−
𝛥𝑟∗ (𝜃𝑠
only possible market equilibrium. ■

is strictly negative for all 𝜃𝑠 > 𝜃𝑚. Hence, greenwashing is the

𝑃 (𝑞∗)− 𝐵

𝛥𝑝 +𝛥𝑐

) <

)

)

(

When Greenwashing arises in equilibrium, see sufficient Condition
in Lemma C.1, a taxonomy is needed to ensure impact. Given some
taxonomy  standard 𝜃𝑠,  the  critical  threshold  investor  now  obtains  a
non-pecuniary dividend of

𝑤∗ = 𝛥𝑟∗ − 𝜂(𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚).

Apart from this different cut-off, all of our analysis holds true: First, the
supply of sustainable funds is still given by 𝐾[1 − 𝐹 (𝑤∗)]; second, 𝑞∗
𝑠
is still obtained by applying the derived equity multiplier, so that we
now obtain
)
𝑠 = 𝐾[1 − 𝐹 (𝛥𝑟∗ − 𝜂(𝜃𝑠 − 𝜃𝑚)
𝑞∗
]

𝑐 (𝜃𝑠
Third, and most importantly, all of our subsequent analysis applies, as
this does not depend on the specific characterization of the cutoff 𝑤∗.
That is, it is still true that introducing a taxonomy is only valuable if
either environmental policy is sufficiently lax or financial constraints
bind under optimal environmental policy.

𝑘∗
) 𝑘∗ − 1

.

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

Appendix D.  Sustainable finance disclosure regulation (SFDR)

The  European  Union’s  Sustainable  Finance  Disclosure  Regulation
(SFDR) aims at enhancing sustainability-related disclosure. The regu-
lation is part of the European Commissions’ Action Plan on Sustainable
Finance. It applies to all financial products domiciled in the EU or sold
to EU investors. The SFDR came into force in two steps (December 2019
and, with some delay, January 2023).37

The SFDR sets out three categories of investment products. Products
that meet certain ESG criteria are referred to as Article 8 or Article
9 products. All other products are now referred to as Article 6 prod-
ucts, and it is compulsive to label them as “non-sustainable.” Article
8  products  are  often  referred  to  as  “light  green,”  as  they  promote
environmental or social characteristics in the pursuit of other financial
objectives. Article 9 products are often referred to as “dark green,” as
they  seek  to  make  a  positive  impact  on  society  or  the  environment
through sustainable investment. Hence, a non-financial objective is at
the core of the latter products.

At the heart of the distinction, as well as of the disclosure require-
ments,  is  the  concept  of  taxonomy-aligned  investments.  A  financed
economic activity is either taxonomy-aligned or not. Article 9 funds
must ensure that all the companies they invest in are EU taxonomy-
aligned.  Article  8  products  must  report  the  fraction  of  investments
that are taxonomy-aligned. For this, funds need to divide the market
value of taxonomy-aligned investments by the total market value of all
investments. This calculation can rely either on the taxonomy report of
invested companies, or on data gathered directly by the fund. The key
concept of taxonomy-alignment is explained next:

The undertaken, taxonomy-aligned economic activity must have a
substantial positive environmental impact or it must reduce (otherwise
incurred)  negative  impacts.  An  eligible  economic  activity  is  an  eco-
nomic activity that is described in the regulation and satisfies technical
screening criteria set out in the taxonomy. The taxonomy has technical
screening criteria for over 170 activities (as set out in the Climate Dele-
gated Act and the Environmental Delegated Act) and is evolving. These
activities make a substantial contribution to one or more of the acts’
climate and environmental objectives (climate protection, adaptation to
climate change, sustainable use of water or marine resources, transition
to a circular economy, prevention or control of pollution and protection
and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems).

For example, electricity generation from wind power is an eligible
activity,  while  electricity  generation  from  coal  is  not  eligible.  Also,
manufacturing of batteries can contribute to climate change mitigation,
and it must be shown that their production and use results in substantial
greenhouse gas emissions reductions.

Eligible economic activities must also not do significant harm to
the  other  climate  and  environmental  objectives  and  the  respective
undertakings must demonstrate compliance with minimum standards
on human rights, social responsibility, labor rights, and anti-corruption
procedures (as set out in the OECD Guidelines for Multinational En-
terprises, the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,
the  International  Labour  Organization’s  declaration  on  Fundamental
Rights and Principles at Work and its core conventions, as well as the
International Bill of Human Rights).

References

Allen,  Franklin,  Barbalau,  Adelina,  Zeni,  Federica,  2023.  Reducing  carbon  using

regulatory and financial market tools. Available at SSRN 4357160.

Azarmsa,  Ehsan,  Shapiro,  Joel,  2023.  The  market  for  ESG  ratings.  Working  Paper,

Oxford University.

37 Phase 1 focuses on broad entity-level disclosures around topics such as
the entity’s policies regarding principal adverse sustainability impacts (PASIs)
and related actions. Level 2 focuses on more detailed entity- and product-level
disclosures.

14 

Bartram, Söhnke M., Hou, Kewei, Kim, Sehoon, 2022. Real effects of climate policy:

Financial constraints and spillovers. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (2), 668–696.

Berg, Florian,  Kölbel, Julian F., Rigobon, Roberto,  2022. Aggregate  Confusion:  The

Divergence of ESG Ratings. Rev. Finance 26 (6), 1315–1344.

Berk, Jonathan, van Binsbergen, Jules H., 2021. The impact of impact investing. J.

Financ. Econ. (forthcoming).

Biais,  Bruno,  Landier,  Augustin,  2022.  Emission  caps  and  investment  in  green

technologies. Working Paper, HEC Paris.

Bizzotto, Jacopo, Harstad, Bård, 2023. The certifier for the long run. Int. J. Ind. Organ.

87, 102920.

Bonnefon, Jean-Francois, Landier, Augustin, Sastry, Parinitha, Thesmar, David, 2019.
The moral preferences of investors: Experimental evidence. Working Paper, TSE,
MIT and HEC.

Boyle, Kevin J., Desvousges, William H., Johnson, F. Reed, Dunford, Richard W., Hud-
son, Sara P., 1994. An investigation of part-whole biases in contingent-valuation
studies. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 27 (1), 64–83.

Broccardo, Eleonora, Hart, Oliver, Zingales, Luigi, 2022. Exit versus voice. J. Polit.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan, Davies, Shaun William, Waters, Brian, 2018. Investing for impact.

Econ. 130 (12), 3101–3145.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (3), 864–904.

Dangl, Thomas, Halling, Michael, Yu, Jin, Zechner, Josef, 2023. Social preferences and

corporate investment. Working Paper, WU Vienna.

Davies,  Shaun  William,  Van  Wesep,  Edward  Dickersin,  2018.  The  unintended

consequences of divestment. J. Financ. Econ. 128 (3), 558–575.

de  Freitas  Netto,  Sebastiao  Vieira,  Sobral,  Marcos  Felipe  Falcao,  Ribeiro,  Ana
Regina  Bezerra,  Soares,  Gleibson  Robert  da  Luz,  2020.  Concepts  and  forms  of
greenwashing: a systematic review. Environ. Sci. Europe 32 (19).

Desvousges, William, Mathews, Kristy, Train, Kenneth, 2012. Adequate responsiveness

to scope in contingent valuation. Ecol. Econom. 84, 121–128.

Döttling, Robin J., Levit, Doron Y., Malenko, Nadya, Rola-Janicka, Magdalena A., 2024.
Voting on Public Goods: Citizens vs. Shareholders. NBER Working Papers 32605,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Döttling,  Robin,  Rola-Janicka,  Magdalena,  2022.  Too  levered  for  pigou?  A  model
of  environmental  and  financial  regulation.  Working  Paper,  Erasmus  University
Rotterdam and Tilburg University.

Edmans, Alex, Levit, Doron, Schneemeier, Jan, 2022. Socially responsible divestment.

European Corporate Governance Institute–Finance Working Paper.

Farre-Mensa, Joan, Ljungqvist, Alexander, Schroth, Enrique J., 2022. How prevalent
are financial constraints in the US?. Swedish House of Finance Research Paper.
Favilukis, Jack, Garlappi, Lorenzo, Uppal, Raman, 2024. How Effective are Portfolio

Green, Daniel, Roth, Benjamin, 2021. The allocation of socially responsible capital. J.

Mandates. Working Paper.

Finance (forthcoming).

Gupta, Deeksha, Kopytov, Alexandr, Starmans, Jan, 2022. The pace of change: Socially

responsible investing in private markets. Available at SSRN 3896511.

Hakenes,  Hendrik,  Schliephake,  Eva,  2021.  Responsible  investment  and  responsible

consumption. Working Paper, University of Bonn.

Heeb, Florian, Kölbel, Julian F, Paetzold, Falko, Zeisberger, Stefan, 2023. Do investors

care about impact? Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (5), 1737–1787.

Heinkel, Robert, Kraus, Alan, Zechner, Josef, 2001. The effect of green investment on

corporate behavior. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 36 (4), 431–449.

Hoffmann, Florian, Inderst, Roman, Moslener, Ulf, 2017. Taxing externalities under

financing constraints. Econ. J. 127 (606), 2478–2503.

Holmström, Bengt, Tirole, Jean, 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and

the real sector. Q. J. Econ. 112 (3), 663–691.

Inderst,  Roman,  Heider,  Florian,  2022.  A  corporate  finance  perspective  on

environmental policy. Working Paper, Goethe University Frankfurt.

Kahneman,  Daniel,  2000.  Evaluation  by  moments:  Past  and  future.  Choices  Values

Frames 693–708.

Kahneman, Daniel, Knetsch, Jack L., 1992. Valuing public goods: The purchase of moral

satisfaction. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 22 (1), 57–70.

Kaufmann, Marc, Andre, Peter, Kőszegi, Botond, 2024. Understanding markets with

socially responsible consumers*. Q. J. Econ. 139 (3), 1989–2035.

Landier, Augustin, Lovo, Stefano, 2020. Social responsible investing: How to optimize

impact? Rev. Financ. Stud. (forthcoming).

Lanteri,  Andrea,  Rampini,  Adriano  A.,  2023.  Financing  the  adoption  of  clean

technology. Working Paper, Duke University.

Laux, Volker, Mahieux, Lucas, 2024. Exploiting social funds’ desire for impact through

imprecise financial climate-risk information. Working Paper.

Moisson, Paul-Henri, 2020. Ethics and impact investment. Working Paper, TSE.
Oehmke, Martin, Opp, Marcus, 2022. Green capital requirements. Working Paper, LSE

Oehmke, Martin, Opp, Marcus M., 2024. A theory of socially responsible investment.

Rev. Econ. Stud. rdae048 (forthcoming).

Papoutsi,  Mellina,  Piazzesi,  Monika,  Schneider,  Martin,  2021.  How  unconventional
is green monetary policy?. Working Paper, European Central Bank and Stanford
University.

Pastor, Lubos, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian, 2021. Sustainable investing in

equilibrium. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 550–571.

and SSE.

R. Inderst and M.M. Opp

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103954 

Pedersen,  Lasse  Heje,  Fitzgibbons,  Shaun,  Pomorski,  Lukasz,  2021.  Responsible

investing: The ESG-efficient frontier. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 572–597.

Piccolo, Alessio, Schneemeier, Jan, Bisceglia, Michele, 2022. Externalities of responsible

investments. Available at SSRN 4183855.

Rennert, Kevin, Errickson, Frank, Prest, Brian C., Rennels, Lisa, Newell, Richard G.,
Pizer, William, Kingdon, Cora, Wingenroth, Jordan, Cooke, Roger, Parthum, Bryan,
et al., 2022. Comprehensive evidence implies a higher social cost of CO2. Nature
610 (7933), 687–692.

Riedl, Arno, Smeets, Paul, 2017. Why do investors hold socially responsible mutual

funds? J. Finance 72 (6), 2505–2550.

Tirole, Jean, 2012. Some political economy of global warming. Econ. Energy Environ.

Policy 1 (1), 121–132.

Tirole, Jean, 2023. Socially responsible agencies. Compet. Law Policy Debate 7 (4),

171–177.

Xu, Qiping, Kim, Taehyun, 2022. The limits of limited liability: Evidence from industrial

pollution. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (2), 576–635.

15 

