Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The moral preferences of investors: Experimental evidence✩
Jean-François Bonnefon a, Augustin Landier b,∗, Parinitha Sastry c, David Thesmar d,e,f
a TSE and IAST, France
b HEC Paris, France
c Columbia Business School, United States
d MIT Sloan School of Management, United States
e NBER, United States
f CPER, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We characterize investors’ moral preferences in a parsimonious experimental setting, where we auction stocks
with various ethical features. We find strong evidence that investors seek to align their investments with their
social values (‘‘value alignment’’), and find no evidence of behavior driven by the social impact of investment
decisions (‘‘impact-seeking preferences’’). First, the willingness to pay (WTP) for a stock is an increasing and
quasi-linear function of corporate externalities. Second, this WTP does not change when corporate externalities
are made contingent on investors buying the auctioned stock. Our results are thus compatible with a utility-
maximization model where non-pecuniary benefits of firms’ externalities only accrue through stock ownership,
not through the actual impact of investment decisions. Finally, the ability to directly contribute to the
externality (by donating) does not reduce the willingness to pay for virtuous stocks.

Dataset link: Moral Preferences of Investors : Ex
perimental Evidence -- Replication Package (Or
iginal data)

JEL classification:
G11
G41
D62
D64

Keywords:
Portfolio choice
Externalities
Behavioral finance
ESG investing

1.  Introduction

This paper uses incentivized experiments to characterize investors’
moral  preferences.  Over  recent  years,  responsible  asset  management
has  developed  considerably  in  size.  However,  the  exact  nature  of
responsible  investors’  preferences  remains  somewhat  elusive.  There
are essentially two main views of investors’ ethical preferences in the
literature. One view is that responsible investors experience corporate
externalities of their portfolio companies as a non-pecuniary dividend.
This type of preference, sometimes referred to as value-alignment, re-
flects  investors’  aversion  for  owning  companies  that  do  not  have  a
business  model  in  line  with  their  own  moral  values.  This  view  of
investors’  social  preferences  is  the  one  that  is  most  often  modeled
in the portfolio choice literature (see e.g. Heinkel et al. (2001) and

more recently Pástor et al. (2021) and Pedersen et al. (2021)). How-
ever,  a  second  type  of  social  preference  might  drive  responsible  in-
vestors: the concern for having a positive social impact through their
choices (Barber et al., 2020). Such impact-seeking investors value the
social consequences of their own investment decisions (the fact that
these consequences exist is often referred to as ‘‘additionality’’). Impact
preferences can be modeled by assuming that corporate externalities
enter investors’ utilities unconditional of the stocks they own, with some
weight. This weight reflects their degree of pro-social preferences (see
e.g. Oehmke  and  Opp (2020), Hart  and  Zingales (2017), Broccardo
et  al. (2020), Landier  and  Lovo (2020), Green  and  Roth (2021)).
Philosophically, impact preferences can be associated with consequen-
tialism  (we  only  care  about  the  consequences  of  our  actions  onto
others, see e.g. Singer (2016)), while value-alignment can be associated
with deontological ethics (we adhere to a rule independently of the

✩
We thank Dimitris Papanikolaou who was the editor for this article. We also thank participants of seminars at Harvard, HEC Paris, MIT, Stockholm School of
Economics, Toulouse School of Economics and the AFAs for their comments. Bruno Biais, Oliver Hart and Sam Hartzmark provided very useful feedback. Aidan
Westley provided skillful research assistance at an earlier stage of this project. The authors are grateful to the Sustainability Initiative at MIT for funding. This
study is registered in the AEA RCT Registry and the identifying number is ‘‘AEARCTR-0008764’’.

E-mail addresses:

jean-francois.bonnefon@tse-fr.eu (J.-F. Bonnefon), landier@hec.fr (A. Landier), prs2107@columbia.edu (P. Sastry), thesmar@mit.edu

∗ Corresponding author.

(D. Thesmar).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103955
Received 16 September 2022; Received in revised form 8 October 2024; Accepted 10 October 2024
Available online 1 November 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Published by Elsevier B.V. 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

consequences  of  our  own  actions,  see  e.g. Sandel (2007)).  In  this
paper,  we  use  the  terms  impact-seeking/consequentialist  and  value
alignment/deontological interchangeably.

Distinguishing  between  impact-seeking  behavior  and  value  align-
ment, as well as measuring it, is particularly important for the design
of financial products catering to investors’ moral preferences. This is
because these two sets of preferences have different implications on
investment choices: for example, avoiding investing in polluting com-
panies does not necessarily have any material impact if these companies
are able to finance their projects themselves or with other investors’
capital. Impact-driven investors value transforming ‘‘dirty companies’’
into  less  dirty  ones  through  engagement,  implying  that,  contrary  to
what happens under value-alignment, their portfolios might not nec-
essarily  be  composed  of  companies  that  are  more  socially  virtuous
than  average.  Models  of  value-alignment  (Heinkel  et  al. (2001)  and
more recently Pástor et al. (2021), Zerbib (2020) and Pedersen et al.
(2021))  prescribe  responsible  products  composed  of  companies  with
a better social performance than average. This leads to asset-pricing
implications related to shifting demand for virtuous stocks. By contrast,
models of impact investing lead to different prescriptions. For instance,
in Gollier and Pouget (2014) and Broccardo et al. (2020), responsible
investors focus on engagement, i.e. they actively exercise control or
voting rights to improve the behavior of companies. Similarly, Berk and
van Binsbergen (2021) find that divestitures have only a small effect
on  the  cost  of  capital  of  targeted  companies,  implying  that  socially
conscious  investors  should  rather  invest  in  ‘‘dirty  companies’’  and
exercise control to change them. In Green and Roth (2021), responsible
investors focus on projects that would not be financed otherwise, and
in Oehmke and Opp (2020), they focus on increasing the equilibrium
scale of clean production, taking into account the existence of other
investors. In Landier and Lovo (2020), responsible investors maximize
impact on social welfare by investing in some but not all sectors and
imposing pollution standards on them. These targeted sectors are not
necessarily among the cleanest ones.

To illustrate how shareholders’ moral preferences matter for their
willingness to pay for a stock, let us consider the following thought
experiment. Imagine a one-period setting where a company’s profit per
share is worth $1. Now, assume the company is committed to spending
40% of its profit on charity donations and distributing the rest as a
dividend. Non-altruistic investors would be willing to pay up to $0.6.
However, if investors value the company’s prosocial behavior, the price
they are willing to pay might be at a level 𝑃 higher than 0.6. In this
case, 𝑃 − 0.6 measures the component of valuation by the shareholders
that reflects their moral preferences. If investors are driven by value-
alignment, 𝑃 − 0.6 reflects the utility they get from holding a stock that
spends 0.4 on charity donations. However, if they are impact-driven, 𝑃
should be higher than 0.6 only if the donation depends on them buying
the stock. Indeed, if the donation is set to happen anyway, an impact-
driven investor does not feel compelled to pay more than 0.6: She will
seek to be more efficiently generous.

We exploit this insight by comparing investors’ willingness to pay
when corporate donations either do or do not depend on them buy-
ing the stock that is auctioned. This allows us to disentangle value-
alignment  preferences  from  impact-seeking  preferences.  If  investors
only care about impact, they should not value corporate donations that
would happen regardless of their investment decisions. Our key finding
is that investors’ valuations of corporate donations are highly signif-
icant and that they are indifferent to whether or not their purchase
decision causes the corporate donation. Thus, at least in our setting,
value-alignment largely dominates and impact concerns are negligible.
This result is especially striking since in our setting prosocial impact is
easily measurable (charity donations).

Telling apart value-alignment from impact-seeking preferences, as
our  experimental  setting  allows  us  to,  is  hard  to  do  in  the  field.
There are two main reasons for this. First, social initiatives by firms
may simply be a signal of management quality or an investment in

consumers and employees’ loyalty, hence affecting firm value through a
channel different from investors’ moral preferences. Second, investors
driven by value-alignment can also, though this is not their primary
objective, have an indirect impact on the behavior of companies: by
avoiding investment in ‘‘dirty companies’’, they indirectly increase the
cost of capital of such companies, hence reducing their equilibrium size
and  setting  incentives  to  improve  social  behavior.  This  implies  that
simply  observing  the  type  of  ESG  policies  that  investors  implement
in  the  field  (such  as  avoiding  companies  with  poor  ESG  ratings)  is
not  sufficient  for  disentangling  value-alignment  from  impact-seeking
behavior.

Let  us  now  describe  more  precisely  the  backbone  of  our  online
experiment. We elicit investors’ moral preferences by auctioning sev-
eral types of synthetic companies to participants: some companies are
ethically neutral, some are generous (they distribute a fraction of profits
to  charities),  and  some  exercise  negative  externalities  (they  reduce
planned  transfers  to  charities).  The  experiment  is  incentivized  with
real  money  (we  pay  an  average  hourly  wage  of  $21,  a  reasonably
large  amount  on  online  platforms).  We  first  make  sure  participants
understand the bidding mechanism and its consequences through an
attention-demanding quiz. For those that pass the quiz, we then find
that,  in  our  main  experimental  setting,  participants  integrate  social
externalities into their pricing bids, even though buying the stock does
not change whether the charity transfers happen (see Section 3 for a
simple framework). This is strong evidence of the existence of value-
alignment preferences. The effect is quite symmetric with regard to the
sign of the externality: As we explain in the paper, this is consistent
with participants valuing 61c each dollar given to, or taken from, char-
ities by the firm. We find that the scaling of non-pecuniary preferences
is close to linear: doubling the size of a social externality doubles its
impact on willingness to pay (see Fig. 1, more details below).

To  further  elicit  how  much  participants  care  about  impact,  we
construct a second version of our experiment where bids are pivotal,
meaning  that  charity  transfers  only  happen  if  participants  buy  the
stock. We find that this does not materially change bidding behavior.
Therefore, we find no evidence of impact-seeking motives. Note here
that our participants clearly understand the consequences of their bid-
ding behavior: Our practice quiz tests their understanding that their bid
is, in this case, pivotal. Participants who do not get a perfect score on
this quiz are excluded from the experiment.

We then test whether participants conflate prosocial bidding with
direct charity donation. A possibility is that participants are confused:
They may think that their excess bid goes to the charity. While our
quiz is designed to ensure that they have a perfect understanding of
all cash movements, participants may have forgotten when they are
at  the  bidding  stage.  In  this  case,  we  would  expect  that  prosocial
bidding is a substitute for direct donation. We find two results showing
no substitution between donation and prosocial bidding, i.e., that the
two  behaviors  are  independent.  First,  in  most  conditions,  we  allow
participants to directly donate to the charity. We find donations to be
uncorrelated with pro-social bidding in the cross-section of participants.
Second, in one of our conditions, participants are not allowed to donate,
so that we can measure the effect of this option on prosocial bidding.
We find that the option to donate does not change the sensitivity of
the bid to charity value. Overall, these results are inconsistent with
consequentialist  altruistic  preferences:  In  the  non-pivotal  condition,
participants are willing to overpay (the experimenter) for charity-giving
stocks, but much less willing to directly donate (to charities). Yet, only
the second option really has impact.

We finally run a few robustness checks. First, participants recruited
through MTurk may not be representative of the population of stock
investors. To partially address this, we also run our baseline experi-
ment with participants from a different platform, Prolific. This platform
allows us to target participants who (1) have at least a college degree

2 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

Fig. 1. Linearity of the Relationship between Adjusted Bid and Adjusted Charity Value.
Note: This figure plots the binned scatter plot and 95% confidence intervals of bids against charity values after controlling for selfish values using the ‘‘binsreg’’ stata package
developed by Cattaneo et al. (2023). We pool together the ‘‘Baseline’’ and ‘‘Baseline with Donation’’ treatments. We demean the variables before constructing the bin scatter plot.

and (2) claim to be using an online stock trading platform.1 Another
advantage of Prolific is that it tends to provide higher quality responses
than  MTurk  (especially  since  COVID, Douglas  et  al., 2023),  which
makes this a natural robustness check to run. When comparing par-
ticipants from MTurk (in 2019) and Prolific (in 2022 and 2023), we
find that treatment effects are statistically indistinguishable, although
Prolific survey takers show a tiny glimmer of impact-seekingness. We
further  explore  heterogeneous  effects  along  education,  gender,  and
attentiveness.  While  gender  has  no  real  effect  on  prosocial  bidding
and prevalence of deontological behavior, college graduates seem to
display some small propensity to seek impact compared to high-school
graduates (all of them coming, by design, from MTurk). The effect is
only  marginally  significant  (𝑝 = .082),  but  a  larger  experiment  (we
already have 2496 bidding rounds) may help uncovering it.

Another robustness check that we run tests bidding sensitivity to the
size of stakes. In a separate experimental condition (with both pivotal
and non-pivotal bidding), we simply multiply stakes by 5. Comparing
this with our main sample, we find no difference in prosocial bidding,
and no difference in the insensitivity of bidding to pivotality.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 connects our findings
to three strands of economic literature. Section 3 develops a simple
analytical  framework  that  can  be  used  to  analyze  results.  Section 4
describes our experimental design. Section 5 analyzes in detail our main
experimental results and their economic interpretation. It also analyzes
the substitution with direct donations. Section 6 studies the robustness
to various features of the experimental setting. Section 7 concludes.

2.  Literature review

Our paper is related to three different strands of the literature. A
first set of papers in behavioral economics explores how moral prefer-

1 A limitation of this approach is that most sociodemographics are self-
reported. But they are reported to the survey platform upon enrollment with
Prolific, thus independently of our particular experiment. While participants
may still choose misrepresent who they are, their incentives are not distorted
by  our  specific  experiment.  This  somewhat  alleviates  concerns  of  experi-
menter’s demand. Another reason to believe that participants truthfully report
their  characteristics  is  that,  for  tasks  that  can  be  verified  (like  attention
checks), data quality on this platform tends to be nearly perfect (Douglas et al.,
2023).

ences of agents are expressed in a market context. First and foremost,
a  large  literature  on  altruism  documents  the  prevalence  of  ‘‘warm-
glow’’  (or  impure)  altruism,  i.e.  that  individuals  derive  utility  from
the act of donating itself rather than the impact of the donation. For
instance, Ottoni-Wilhelm et al. (2017) test the presence of deontologi-
cal preferences by varying stake size. Their idea is that, when a cause
already receives enough money from others, consequentialist thinkers
would be less likely to donate themselves, since the goal they care about
is already reached. In our set-up, we measure consequentialist prefer-
ences by directly manipulating impact. Our results are closer in spirit
to Elfenbein and McManus (2010), who find that, in a sample of E-Bay
auctions, consumers are willing to pay higher prices for products that
generate charitable donations. Bartling et al. (2014) use a lab experi-
ment to show that in a market context consumers refrain from buying
goods from firms which have negative social impact. Tasimi and Gross
(2020), Tasimi and Wynn (2016), Crockett et al. (2017) also document
a similar effect outside a market context, showing that people display
an aversion for money earned in a manner that directly or indirectly
harmed others. These moral preferences generate a price premium for
socially responsible products. Leszczyc and Rothkopf (2010) also find
that  auctions  with  proceeds  donated  to  charity  lead  to  significantly
higher  selling  prices,  due  to  higher  bidding  from  participants  with
charitable motives. However, some papers show that a market context
tends to dampen the acuity of moral concerns. Falk and Szech (2013)
documents that markets inherently erode socially responsible behavior.
They use a lab experiment to measure individuals’ willingness to pay
for avoiding the death of a mouse, and show that this willingness to
pay is lower in a market setting than in comparable non-market con-
texts. Sandel (2012) develops a philosophical analysis on how markets
undermine moral values. We contribute to this literature by providing
evidence that moral concerns strongly affect investor’s willingness to
pay for financial claims, and that investors do not take into account
whether their decision to buy a stock is pivotal for the course of firms’
ethical decisions.

Our results also contribute to the literature in financial economics
that is concerned with socially responsible investors and their effect
on  stock  prices  and  corporate  policies.  Using  a  survey, Riedl  and
Smeets (2017) find that ‘‘social preferences’’ (in the sense of attitudes
to reciprocity/fairness) predict the willingness to invest in responsible
financial products and to accept higher fees. In particular, by pairing

3 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

individual  investment  data  with  the  results  of  an  experiment,  they
establish that the decision to invest in a socially responsible fund is
primarily linked to pro-social preferences. They measure prosocial pref-
erences via the second-mover response in a trust game. Our results are
consistent with their findings that (1) individuals are ready to forego
monetary payoffs when investing responsibly, and (2) that responsible
investing is not a simple substitute for charity donation. Unlike Riedl
and Smeets (2017), we do not have the ability to match real mutual
fund investment decisions to our experiment participants. We instead
resort to investment in firms that are synthetic but involve real financial
payoffs. Our main contribution is to precisely characterize the nature
of social preferences by drawing a distinction between impact-driven
motivations and value-alignment motivations of our subjects. Bolton
et al. (2019) use the trail of proxy votes to infer the distribution of
shareholder preferences: They find that a group of investors, includ-
ing  public  pension  funds,  systematically  support  a  more  social  and
environment-friendly orientation of the firm.

Our  findings  vindicate  modelling  assumptions  in Heinkel  et  al.
(2001)  and  more  recently Pástor  et  al. (2021)  and Pedersen  et  al.
(2021), who develop equilibrium models where a fraction of investors
have  a  distaste  for  holding  firms  that  are  not  clean.  These  models
find  that  ‘‘dirty’’  companies  trade  at  a  discount  compared  to  their
‘‘clean’’ peers, because in equilibrium. In line with these findings, Hong
and  Kacperczyk (2009)  documents  that  ‘‘sin  stocks’’  exhibit  positive
abnormal returns. By contrast, Edmans (2011) documents that firms
that  treat  employees  relatively  well  have  positive  abnormal  returns,
which goes against the view that their cost of capital is lower. Margolis
et al. (2011) provides a meta-analysis of the empirical literature that
shows ambiguous correlations between social responsibility and finan-
cial returns. Derwall et al. (2011) finds evidence that reconciles these
seemingly opposite results on returns due to the coexistence of values
driven and profit-driven SRI investors. Krüger (2015) documents that
stock prices react negatively to negative CSR events. Hartzmark and
Sussman (2019) documents large outflows when funds are recatego-
rized as having a poor sustainability footprint (even though there is no
real change in content). Our contribution to this literature is to isolate
the effect of stockholder moral preferences on prices. In all these event
studies, this channel is confounded with the impact of CSR news on
profits (for example via employees, customers or future regulation) and
so it is hard to know if CSR is priced because it enhances financial value
or because shareholders value ethical behavior beyond cash-flows.

Our results are also related to concurrent and complementary work
using experiments to shed light on the pricing of CSR. The key differ-
ence between these papers and ours is that we explore the distinction
between value alignment and impact concerns, a crucial distinction for
models  and  savings  product  design. Brodback  et  al. (2019),  like  us,
use an experiment to explore investor valuations of ethical behavior.
Their paper focuses on whether ethical preferences are state dependent,
and whether participants care more about some charities than others.
They find that investors’ willingness to pay for ethical behavior is lower
when financial performance is poor. In their experimental setting, all
participants  are  pivotal  for  the  charity  outcome;  all  participants  see
the same set of charities; and firms are either ethical or neutral. In
contrast, our paper focuses on the valuation of ethical, neutral, and
unethical firms, and we consider both pivotal and nonpivotal investors,
allowing  us  to  disentangle  impact-seeking  vs.  value-alignment  pref-
erences. Humphrey  et  al. (2021)  analyze  behavior  and  learning  of
investors in an experiment where returns from stocks picked by the
investor are positively or negatively matched by the experimenter with
transfers to charities. They show that investors invest relatively less
in  assets  when  such  investments  have  negative  impact  on  charities.
However, the effect is asymmetric, in that investors do not invest more
in  stocks  entailing  positive  charity  transfers.  Besides  the  absence  of
pivotality (our key concern), the key difference between their setting
and ours is the presence of expectations formation about cash-flows and
externalities. Our setting is more parsimonious: There is no learning

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

and the preliminary quiz ensures participants have exactly the right
expectations about cash-flows and donations.

In  a  contemporary  paper, Heeb  et  al. (2022)  also  evaluate  the
willingness  to  pay  for  shares  of  funds  with  varying  CO2  footprints.
They find that participants are inclined to pay more for investing in
sustainable funds. A key difference between their design and ours, is
that our stark design allows to clearly separate value alignment from
impact.  In  our  setting,  there  is  no  ambiguity  about  whether  buying
shares has a social consequence or not, and all payoffs are measured
in dollars. An advantage of the setting in Heeb et al. (2022) is that it
is closer to a real situation where investors consider the CO2 footprint
of a portfolio, but the downside is that participants might be unsure
of whether and how their investment decision does or does not affect
companies’ emissions. As a result, it is difficult to know if participants
trade for impact or value alignment.

Finally, our results resonate with a political science literature that
investigates the moral motivations behind voting. For instance, Federsen
et al. (2009) run an experiment where participants are asked to vote
about a moral outcome (vs. a selfish one), and vary the extent to which
voters are pivotal. They find that participants mostly express deonto-
logical preferences. In their paper, as pivotality decreases, voters do not
seem to vote more for the ethical alternative (as they should if some
of them were consequentialist). In that sense, their experiment lines
up  with  our  evidence,  which  shows  no  evidence  of  consequentialist
behavior.

3.  Model

We  model  here  our  experimental  condition  which  uses  the  BDM
bidding mechanism (Becker et al., 1964): Participants bid for a stock
that  gives  part  of  its  profits  to  charities.  In  the  model,  we  allow
for limited attention. We explore value-alignment and impact-driven
preferences, and charity donation. This framework allows us to derive
and interpret our simple empirical specification.

3.1.  A simple model of investors’ social preferences

The model is inspired by Leszczyc and Rothkopf (2010). We start
with the non-pivotal condition, where the participant bids for a stock
which donates 𝑐 to the charity, regardless of whether the bid is success-
ful or not. The participant’s utility from holding the stock is given by
𝑢ℎ = 𝑠+𝛼 𝑐+𝜈ℎ, where 𝑠 is the dividend and 𝑐 the money paid by the firm
to the charity. 𝛼 𝑐 reflects the utility from the charity getting 𝑐 when the
participant holds the stock. 𝜈ℎ is an idiosyncratic noise that varies across
participants. If the participant does not hold the stock, her utility is
𝑢𝑟 = 𝛽 𝑐 + 𝜈𝑟. 𝛽 𝑐 reflects utility from donation 𝑐 going to the charity
when she does not hold the stock. A purely consequentialist participant
should only care about the good that is done, independently of whether
she holds the stock or not, i.e. 𝛼 = 𝛽. Alternatively, classic asset pricing
models of ESG investing (e.g. Pástor et al. (2021)) assume that a socially
responsible investor enjoys a private benefit from holding responsible
stocks, i.e. 𝛼 > 0 and 𝛽 = 0.

In our experiment, participants participate in a second price auction
against a random draw (the BDM bidding mechanism). The participant
places  her  bid 𝑏,  while  another  price 𝑝 is  drawn  from  a  uniform
distribution with support [0, ̄𝑝]. The participant only wins the auction
if 𝑏 > 𝑝, and then pays 𝑝. Thus, the expected utility from bidding 𝑏 is
given by:
(

)

̄𝑝

𝑏

𝐸 𝑢 =

1
̄𝑝

(𝑢ℎ − 𝑝)𝑑 𝑝 + ∫

𝑢𝑟𝑑 𝑝

𝑏

∫

0

and the optimal bid 𝑏∗ is given by 𝑏∗ = 𝑠 + (𝛼 − 𝛽)𝑐 + 𝜈ℎ − 𝜈𝑟

Now,  we  assume  that  the  participant  is  inattentive.  Relying  on
Gabaix (2019), we assume that the participant chooses the weighted

4 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

average of a default bid ̄𝑏 and the optimal bid 𝑏∗. Let 𝜆 be the weight
on the optimal bid, so that the bidding decision writes:
𝑏 = (1 − 𝜆)̄𝑏 + 𝜆𝑠 + 𝜆(𝛼 − 𝛽)𝑐 + 𝜖
where we note 𝜖 = 𝜆(𝜈ℎ − 𝜈𝑟). 𝜆 =  1 corresponds to the case of full
attention.

(1)

Since we randomize over 𝑠 and 𝑐, regressing 𝑏 on 𝑠 and 𝑐 identifies
𝜆 and 𝛼 − 𝛽,  but  not 𝛼 and 𝛽 separately.  Identifying 𝛽 is,  however,
interesting, since it measures the part of investor motivation that is
consequentialist. 𝛽 = 0 corresponds to the case of pure value-alignment.
To pin down 𝛽, we use the pivotal condition, where the charity does
not receive any money when the bid fails. In this case, 𝑢𝑟 = 𝜈𝑟. The
observed bid is thus given by:
𝑏 = (1 − 𝜆)̄𝑏 + 𝜆𝑠 + 𝜆𝛼 𝑐 + 𝜖

(2)
Empirical  Specification: In  our  empirical  analysis,  we  run  the

following regression, for bid 𝑖:
𝑏𝑖 = 𝛾 + 𝛿 𝑠𝑖 + 𝜇 𝑐𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖

(3)
Our  model  provides  a  structural  interpretation  for  this  equation.
We find that the sensitivity of bids to cash flows 𝑠𝑖 to be the same
in the pivotal and the non-pivotal condition. This establishes that the
attention parameter 𝜆 is the same in both conditions. Then, if ̂𝜇𝑃 >
̂𝜇𝑁 𝑃 , then Eqs. (1) and (2) show that 𝛽  > 0, so that there is some
consequentialist motive in bidding decisions. If, however, 𝜇𝑃 = 𝜇𝑁 𝑃 ,
then 𝛽 =  0.  Bidders  only  care  about  the  donation  when  they  own
the stock: They are 100% value aligned. We will find evidence of this
(Section 5).

3.2.  Donation option

A natural hypothesis is that investors might confuse prosocial bid-
ding for direct donation. In the baseline condition of our set-up (the
non-pivotal  case),  note  that  this  would  be  an  error,  since  pro-social
bidding amounts to transferring money to the seller (the experimenter),
not the charity. To clarify this, assume participants can directly donate
𝑑 at the end of the experiment. To fix ideas, focus on the non-pivotal
condition  and  start  from  the  benchmark  model  with  full  attention.
Then, utilities are given by:
𝑢ℎ = 𝑠 + 𝛼 𝑐 + ℎ(𝑑) − 𝑑 + 𝜖
𝑢𝑟 = 𝛽 𝑐 + ℎ(𝑑) − 𝑑 + 𝜈
where ℎ is the utility from the charity receiving 𝑑. In this benchmark,
we assume that (1) the utility function is separable in charity value and
direct donation, and (2) utility from direct donation does not depend
on bid success.

This model suggests two tests. First, one can regress observed do-
nation 𝑑 on  the  charity  value 𝑐.  If  utility  is  separable,  agents  con-
sider  prosocial  bidding  and  donating  as  separate  problems.  Then,  it
is  straightforward  to  see  that  optimal  donation  is  uncorrelated  with
charity value.2 We will find evidence consistent with such separability.
The second test consists of comparing the bid-to-charity value sensi-
tivity when donation are impossible (the baseline) and when donations
are  possible.  In  the  above  separable  model,  it  is  easy  to  see  that
excess bids are still given by Eq. (1), whether 𝑑 is chosen optimally
or constrained to zero. We will find evidence consistent with this. Thus
a model where utilities 𝑢ℎ and 𝑢𝑟 are separable, and the donation part
of these utilities does not depend on bid success, will fit the data well.

4.  Experimental design

We first describe the overall structure of our experiment. We then
discuss how the experiment was implemented across three batches. We
recruit participants through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) in our
first batch, and the platform Prolific in our second and third batches.

2 It simply comes from maximizing 𝑢ℎ and 𝑢𝑟 with respect to 𝑑 for given 𝑐,

since donations are made after bidding.

4.1.  Overall structure

In  our  experiment,  participants  bid  for  shares  that  vary  by  how
much cash dividend they pay, and by how much money they add to, or
remove from, a fund that will be donated to charities. Each participant
bids on three different company types in random order. The ‘‘ethical’’
company gives away some shareholder profits to a charity ‘‘wallet’’;
the ‘‘unethical’’ company takes money away from the charity ‘‘wallet’’
and gives it to shareholders; and the ‘‘neutral’’ company neither gives
to,  nor  takes  money  from,  the  charity  wallet.  To  participate  in  the
experiment, participants have to pass a practice quiz that ensures they
can understand the cash movements between the firm, their own wallet
and the charity wallet.

To  elicit  the  truthful  valuation  of  the  dividend  and  the  charity
donation, we use the classic Becker–DeGroot–Marschak (BDM) bidding
mechanism (Becker et al., 1964). Participants first place their bids, and
then a share price is drawn from a uniform distribution after bids are
submitted. Participants must then buy the share if their bid is larger
than  the  random  price.  To  emphasize  that  participants  are  playing
against a random price, we present the random value as the result of a
spinning wheel of fortune (see Appendix Figure A.3, to which we return
below). As discussed in Section 3, the BDM mechanism will allow us to
measure the extent of attention and the structure of pro-social bidding.

We define three variables:

1. ‘‘Selfish  value’’  is  the  cash  dividend  directly  paid  to  the  par-
ticipant  by  the  firm  (𝑠 in  Eq.  (3)).  Individuals  only  receive  a
dividend from the company if they buy the share.

2. ‘‘Charity  value’’  is  the  amount  added  to,  or  subtracted  from,
the charity wallet by the firm (𝑐 in Eq. (3)). In the case of an
unethical company, the participant receives the company profit
plus some amount subtracted from the charity wallet, and so the
charity value is negative. Otherwise, it is zero (neutral company)
or positive (ethical company).

3. ‘‘Bid’’ is the amount that is effectively bid by the participant (𝑏

in Eq. (3)).

The  model  in  Section 3 provides  a natural  interpretation  for  the
cross-sectional  regression  of 𝑏 on 𝑠 and 𝑐.  The  coefficient  on 𝑠 al-
lows for measuring imperfect attention. This coefficient should be 1
if attention was perfect. In a recent paper, in the absence of charity
donation, Charles  et  al. (2024)  find  it  to  be  around  0.6.  We  will
obtain  similar  orders  of  magnitude.  The  coefficient  on 𝑐 measures
the  combination  of  imperfect  attention  and  pro-social  bidding,  with
a slightly different interpretation depending on whether bidding does
(pivotal condition) or does not affect donation (non-pivotal condition),
as explained in Section 3.

4.2.  Sequence of events: Baseline condition

We now describe the baseline condition in detail, and the variants
in later sections. In the baseline, we start the experiment by asking
respondents to agree to a consent form that includes a one sentence
description of the experiment, a ball park estimate of payments, and
the experiment’s expected duration. In the first page of the interface,
participants are given a short description of the game. They are told
they will begin the experiment with a ‘‘virtual wallet’’ containing $2.00.
Separately, $1.00 is placed in a fund that is pledged to a charity, which
we refer to as the ‘‘charity wallet.’’ Participants are then told that they
will make investment decisions that affect how much money is added
or subtracted from both their wallets and the charity wallet. At the end
of the experiment, participants receive a base payment of $2.00 and a
bonus equal to the amount in their virtual wallet. The charity receives
the final content of the charity wallet.

In the baseline (or non-pivotal) condition, we make it clear that both
successful and failed bids lead to the same changes in the charity wallet.
As discussed in Section 3, purely impact-driven investors should not be

5 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

willing to pay more than 𝑠, the selfish value. Even if they are altruistic,
consequentialist  investors  are  not  expected  to  bid  at  a  premium  for
ethical firms (or at a discount for unethical ones), since their action
has no consequence for the charity.

At the end of this first page, participants are asked to select the
charity that will receive the content of the charity wallet. Participants
choose  from  the  following  six  options:  the  American  Civil  Liberties
Union,  the  World  Wildlife  Fund,  Food  for  the  Poor,  the  American
Cancer  Society,  Save  the  Children,  and  the  Environmental  Defense
Fund. The charities are well-respected nationally and span a range of
environmental, social, and governance issues. We provide a screenshot
of the first page in Appendix Figure A.1.

Participants then proceed to the practice quiz, a key step designed to
ensure that they fully understand how the bidding game works and the
exact consequences of their choices on the various cash movements.
Participants are first shown a detailed example of the ‘‘neutral’’ firm
that does not modify the charity wallet. They are forced to click line-
by-line through the example to ensure slow digestion of information.
They do not make any decisions and are not asked any questions during
the  example  (we  provide  a  screenshot  of  this  example  in  Appendix
Figure A.2) Afterwards, participants are quizzed on both a hypothetical
‘‘ethical’’ and an ‘‘unethical’’ firm, which respectively add money to,
and  subtract  money  from,  the  charity  wallet.  Participants  are  given
three opportunities to obtain a perfect score on the whole practice quiz.
Only those who pass may continue to the main experiment. Those who
do  not  receive  a  perfect  score  fill  out  demographic  questions  about
their background, and then exit the experiment. They receive the base
payment to compensate them for their time.

The details of the practice quiz are as follows. The individual is
shown, in random order, two hypothetical situations, which vary ac-
cording to two dimensions. The first dimension is about the company’s
prosocial actions: one is ethical and the other one unethical. Specif-
ically, we set the parameters of the quiz so that the ethical company
gives $0.4 of its $1.5 profit to charity, and the unethical company earns
$0.7 in profits and takes $0.4 from the charity. The second dimension
is about the success or failure of the hypothetical bid. In the ‘‘succeed’’
scenario, the random price is set at $0.50, while we tell the participants
to  consider  a  hypothetical  bid  of  $1.1,  so  that  the  company  share
is actually purchased at this bid (for a price of $0.50). In the ‘‘fail’’
scenario,  the  random  price  is  set  at  $2,  above  the  hypothetical  bid
value of $1.1, so that the company share is not purchased. Participants
see  four  scenarios  drawn  at  random:  The  first  firm  is  ethical  with
probability 1/2 (in which case the second firm is unethical), and the
bid is successful with independent probability 1/2 (in which case the
second firm is not purchased). After presenting each hypothetical, we
quiz participants on whether the firm’s share is purchased at this hy-
pothetical bid and random price, how much they would hypothetically
receive in dividends, and how much the charity would hypothetically
receive/lose under the given parameters. We provide a screenshot of
the practice quiz for the unethical company in Appendix Figure A.3

Once  participants  have  fully  mastered  the  quiz,  they  progress  to
the  main  experiment.  In  the  main  experiment,  participants  see  the
three  company  types  (unethical,  ethical,  neutral)  in  random  order.
Each round, the company randomly draws a profit 𝜋 ∈  {0.5, 0.6, 0.7,
0.8, 0.9, 1}. If neutral, it gives the entirety of this profit to the share-
holder (𝑠 = 𝜋). If ethical, the company gives a random portion of this
profit to the charity 𝑐 ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}, and the rest, 𝜋 − 𝑐 = 𝑠, to
the shareholder. The unethical company takes money from the charity
wallet −𝑐 ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}. The participants obtains the profits
plus the charity money 𝜋 − 𝑐. Note that this sequential randomization
induces a mechanical correlation between charity donation 𝑐 and selfish
value 𝑠 = 𝜋 − 𝑐. This is not a problem for our regression specification,
which uses both of these variables as regressors. Finally, the random
price generated for the BDM mechanism is between 0 and $2.

We  provide  a  screenshot  of  the  bid  for  an  unethical  company
in  Appendix  Figure  A.4(a).  We  randomly  vary  the  order  in  which
firm types (neutral, ethical and unethical) are presented in the main

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

experiment (as we did in the quiz). At the end of the paper, we test
if our results are affected by the order of presentation in either the
practice quiz or the main experiment — and find that they are not (See
Appendix Table C.2).

After bidding on all three companies, participants are shown the
amount in both their personal wallet and the charity wallet. Finally,
we ask participants to answer a short survey designed to provide data
on socio-demographics (education, age, gender, financial literacy, etc.).
In the next subsection we describe each of the treatment conditions

in our three experiment batches.

4.3.  Main treatment conditions (batch 1)

We conducted the first batch of experiments on MTurk to test the
model in Section 3. There are two separate installments, first on July
22, 2019, and then two weeks later on August 5th, 2019. We have 448
participants in total, of which 369 passed the quiz, allocated to 3 main
conditions already discussed in Section 33:

1. Baseline/non-pivotal: The pure baseline condition is exactly the
one described in the previous section. Participants are asked to
bid on three firms, and the charity donation 𝑐 occurs regardless
of  whether  the  individual  ends  up  owning  the  stock  or  not.
Appendix Figure A.4(a) shows a screenshot of baseline condition
for an example unethical firm.

2. Baseline/non-pivotal  with  donation:  This  condition  is  the  same
as  the  baseline  described  above,  except  that  participants  can
directly donate to the charity from their personal wallet. This
opportunity is offered at the end of the experiment, but adver-
tised in the first screen. We provide a screenshot of the donation
screen in Appendix Figure A.5.

3. Pivotal  with  donation:  In  the  pivotal  condition, no  money will
be added or removed from the charity wallet if the participant
does not end up buying the stock (see Appendix Figure A.4(b)
for a sample screenshot). The practice quiz is similarly adapted,
ensuring that participants are fully aware that, if the bid fails,
there  is  no  transfer  to  charity  (see  Appendix  Figure  A.6  for
a  screenshot  of  an  example  unethical  firm).  As  in  the  second
condition, donation is an option at the end, and advertised at
the beginning (Appendix Figure A.5)

These  three  conditions  directly  test  the  hypotheses  outlined  in
Section 3. Comparing conditions (2) and (3) allows us to estimate 𝛼
(hedonic  flow  of  owning  a  stock  that  donates)  and 𝛽 (hedonic  flow
of  not  owning  it).  Furthermore,  comparing  conditions  (1)  and  (2)
allows us to determine to what extent bidding and direct donations are
substitutes.

4.4.  Prolific (batch 2)

One possible concern with our MTurk experiment is that partici-
pants are not representative of investors. In order to partially address
this,  we  conducted  one  last  round  of  experiments  on  the  platform
Prolific, which has two main advantages over MTurk. First, participants
have to register with the platform, and the platform verifies some of the
self-reported information. This helps improve the reliability of reported
socio-demographics relative to MTurk. Second, the platform allows for
selecting participants according to some of these characteristics. We
use  this  second  feature  to  restrict  the  sample  in  this  last  batch  to
participants who (1) use a stock trading platform and (2) have a degree
from 2 or 4 year college. In doing so we are hoping to narrow the focus
on college graduates with some financial knowledge, participants who
are a bit closer in demographics to the average investor.

3 There  are  two  additional  treatments  from  the  second  wave:  Stocks
purchased  on  behalf  of  another  participant,  and  Randomized  charity  (see
Appendix D) Although including these two treatments would not change our
main results, we omit them from the paper because they do not directly test
our core hypothesis, and would therefore reduce the clarity of exposition.

6 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

We ran this second batch in only one round on July 6, 2022, and
recruited 300 participants, of which 250 passed the quiz. It contains
two conditions, to which participants are allocated randomly: (1) Base-
line with Donation and (2) Pivotal with Donation. These conditions are
identical in all respects to the two conditions with donation in first batch.
In both cases, and as in the first batch, participants have the option to
donate part of their earnings at the end of the experiment, and are told
so in advance.

4.5.  Prolific & symmetry (batch 3)

This last batch reproduces the experiments of the second batch, with
more symmetric wording in the non-pivotal condition. A possible worry
in batches 1 and 2 is that, in the non-pivotal condition, the wording is
slightly asymmetric between successful and unsuccessful bids: We do
not say explicitly in the prompt what happens when the bid fails. There
is no such asymmetry in the pivotal condition (see Appendix Figure
A.4) To check that our results were not driven by this, we ran, on May
2023, a slightly modified version of the experiment in Batch 2, where
the only difference is that we add ‘‘if you do not buy the share’’ when
the bid fails in the non-pivotal condition (see Appendix Figure A.7) This
is a bit more explicit.

This last batch of experiments has 299 participants, of which 213
passed the quiz. The conditions are otherwise identical to Batch 2. We
first checked whether our main specification yields different results in
this  new  batch.  We  show  in  Appendix  Table  C.1  that  they  are  not.
The  sensitivities  of  bids  to  charity  value  and  selfish  values  are  not
significantly different across conditions. They are strongly significant in
Batch 2, where the slightly smaller t-stats can be explained by the fact
that Batch 3 is smaller than Batches 1 and 2 taken together. Overall,
given that our regression yields the same result in Batch 3 as in the
previous  two  batches,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  wording  slightly
differs,  we  decide  to  pool  all  three  batches  to  maximize  statistical
power.

4.6.  Robustness to larger stakes

At the same time as our third batch of participants, we also ran
a separate condition to test the effect of larger stakes (in May 2023
as  well).  This  condition  is  exactly  identical  to  Batch  3,  except  that
stakes are multiplied by 5. Profits are drawn from {2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, 4.5}.
Charity values are drawn in {0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5}. Because the stakes are
five times larger in these conditions, we do not pool it with our main
tests, but only use this sample for robustness. We later directly compare
regression results in our pooled sample (batches 1,2,3) and results in
this ‘‘larger stakes’’ condition (this will be in Table 9, described below).
As we will see, pooling large stakes with our 3 batches will bias our
econometric specification because large stakes have a larger constant
(and would thus bias pro-social bidding upwards).

In total, 298 participants to the third batch are randomly assigned
to this ‘‘larger stakes’’ condition. Out of these, 245 passed the quiz:
116 in the non-pivotal condition, 129 in the pivotal condition. These
conditions are exactly the same as Batch 3: the quiz that participants
must pass depends on pivotality, participants are recruited on Prolific,
the set-up is identical to Batch 3 (with symmetric wording), and there
is a possibility to donate at the end (see the fourth column of 1).

4.7.  Descriptive statistics

We describe here our main sample of Batches 1,2 and 3 (and do not
discuss the ‘‘Larger Stakes’’ sample, which we will analyze separately).
Table 1 shows summary statistics about quiz passing rates, payments
and condition characteristics across the three batches and five waves
of our experiment. There are 1047 participants in total, but only 832
passed the quiz (passing rate: 79%). The number of participants per
condition  is  around  110,  slightly  larger  than  this  in  our  first  batch,

Table 1
Description of the experiment and treatments.
Main sample
Batch 1 Batch 2 Batch 3

2023
299
213

Panel A: Description
Platform
Mturk Prolific Prolific
Experiment Year
2022
2019
Participants (count)
300
448
Passed Quiz (count)
250
369
Quiz passing rate (%)
82.37 83.33 71.24
Average duration (mins)
11.76 14.76 21.03
Base Payment ($)
3.00
2.00
Participant’s wallet (average $) 2.31
2.05
Charity wallet (average $)
1.23
1.05
Panel B: Main experiment treatment conditions (Number of participants)
114
Baseline
Baseline with donation
131
Pivotal with donation
124

3.00
2.19
1.28

–
124
89

–
118
132

Robustness
Larger stakes

Prolific
2023
298
245
82.21
15.11
3.00
10.01
5.96

–
116
129

Table 2
Demographics by treatment condition and platform.

Baseline

Baseline with Donation

Pivotal with donation

Panel A: MTurk
18–35
35–55
55+
College
Male
Fin. Lit.
Stocks
Panel B: Prolific
18–35
35–55
55+
College
Male
Fin. Lit.
Stocks

0.54
0.32
0.13
0.68
0.61
0.76
0.29

0.40
0.44
0.16
0.97
0.57
0.88
0.59

0.56
0.40
0.04
0.51
0.62
0.81
0.19

0.56
0.35
0.08
0.63
0.57
0.78
0.25

0.44
0.40
0.16
1.00
0.67
0.84
0.64

slightly smaller in the last batch. Generally speaking, participants in
Batch  3  tended  to  fail  the  quiz  more  often,  and  be  slower,  but  not
significantly  so.  Bonuses  hover  around  $2.2  and  charity  donations
around $1.1. Overall, our pooled sample has 2496 bids because each
of the 832 participants bids on the three company types: (1∕3 neutral,
1∕3 ethical, and 1∕3 unethical firms).

Overall, demographic groups are reasonably balanced across MTurk
treatments  (allocation  is  random,  but  we  ran  several  waves  over  a
period  of  4  years). Table  2 presents  the  summary  statistics  on  de-
mographics  by  treatment  condition  and  platform.  Panel  A  presents
statistics on participants in the main experiment on MTurk, and Panel
B presents statistics on participants in the main experiment on Prolific.
About 60% of the participants are male.  Consistent with the notion
that Prolific allows to filter for college degree and stock trading, albeit
imperfectly, we find that, among those who pass the quiz, the shares of
college graduates and stock owners both increase dramatically. Clearly,
the Prolific filters do not work perfectly (share of those who report
trading stocks is only 60% in our survey question), but they seem to
shift the composition of the pool of participants in a significant way.

5.  Main results

In this section, we first explore the baseline/non-pivotal condition.
We then compare this baseline with the pivotal condition, which allows
for separately identifying the parameters 𝛼 and 𝛽 discussed in Section 3,
i.e.  the  share  of  deontological  and  consequentialist  motivations  in
participants’ bids.

7 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Table 3
The sensitivity of bids to charity values: Baseline.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

Table 4
The sensitivity of bids to pivotality.

Charity value

Charity value2

1
2

(Charity value)−

(Charity value)+

Selfish value

Constant

LHS: Bid
(1)

.37***
(.073)

.61***
(.069)

.28***
(.055)

(2)

.37***
(.073)

−.4*
(.24)

.62***
(.069)

.29***
(.055)

(3)

.46***
(.091)

.28***
(.086)

.62***
(.069)

.29***
(.055)

0.08

0.08

1,461

1,461

1,461

Observations
R2
P-value asymmetry
Note: The LHS is the bid, 𝑏. We regress the bid on the dividend 𝑠 (Selfish value), and the
amount transferred by the charity to the company 𝑐 (Charity value). We pool together
all baseline-related conditions (baseline and baseline with donation). We report in the
last line the 𝑝-value is for the t-test of equality of coefficients for (𝐶 ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑢𝑒)− and
(𝐶 ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑢𝑒)+. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the worker level. * p <
0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

.082

0.08

Charity value

Selfish value

Constant

LHS: Bid
(1)

Pooled

.45***
(.057)

.63***
(.053)

.25***
(.042)

(2)

(3)

Baseline

Pivotal

.37***
(.073)

.61***
(.069)

.28***
(.055)

.55***
(.089)

.65***
(.081)

.22***
(.064)

0.07

0.08

0.07

.127

1,035

1,461

2,496

Observations
R2
P-value of equality (Charity value)
P-value of equality (Selfish value)
Note: The LHS is the bid, 𝑏. We regress the bid on the dividend 𝑠 (Selfish value),
and the amount transferred by the charity to the company 𝑐 (Charity value). Column 2
uses the ‘‘baseline’’ conditions from Table 3; column 3 uses the ‘‘pivotal with donation’’
condition, and Column 1 include the pooled estimates. We report in the second-to-last
line the 𝑝-value of the t-test that the regression coefficients on ‘‘Charity value’’ for
the ‘‘baseline’’ treatment is equal to the coefficient for the ‘‘pivotal with donation’’
treatment.  We  report  in  the  last  line  the 𝑝-value  of  the  t-test  that  the  regression
coefficient on ‘‘Selfish value’’ for the ‘‘baseline’’ treatment is equal to the coefficient
for the ‘‘pivotal with donation’’ treatment. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at
the worker level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

.738

5.1.  Baseline: Evidence of value alignment

We  start  by  restricting  our  focus  to  participants  in  the  baseline
conditions, where bids are non-pivotal. Across all three batches, this
leads to 487 participants, or 1,461 rounds of bidding. Note that this
approach puts together 373 participants who were allowed to directly
donate, and 114 who were not. As we will see below, estimates do
not significantly differ between the types, so we pool them all to gain
power.

As discussed in Section 3, our empirical strategy consists of running

the following regression:
𝑏𝑖 = 𝛾 + 𝛿 𝑠𝑖 + 𝜇 𝑐𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖

where 𝛿 measures the degree of attention to the bidding process, while
𝜇 conflates the effect of attention and non-consequentialist altruistic
considerations in bidding. 𝜇 is expected to be zero if, in the model,
𝛼 = 𝛽: if participants are impact-driven enjoy the warm glow of charity
donation, whether they own the stock or not. If however owning the
stock makes a difference, 𝜇 > 0 (𝛼  > 𝛽), and participants have some
deontological preference.

In Fig. 1, we provide graphical evidence on the sensitivity of bids
to  charity  donation.  We  show  a  binned  scatter  plot,  controlling  for
selfish value 𝑠. We need to control for 𝑠 because, as explained above,
our randomization design induces a mechanical correlation between 𝑐
and 𝑠. To do this, we use the approach recently developed by Cattaneo
et al. (2023). As it appears quite clearly, there is a positive, monotonic
relationship  between  bids  and  charity  value,  after  controlling  for 𝑠.
Overall, this is evidence that value alignment matters: Participants bid
higher for companies that donate more (even though their bid has no
impact).

Table  3 shows  the  formal  regression.  Again,  here,  we  focus  on
the same 1461 rounds of bidding of the 3 quasi-baselines. Consistent
with Fig.  1,  we  see  in  column  1  that  the  sensitivity  of  bidding  to
charity  value,  controlling  for  selfish  value,  is  .37  (𝑡 =  5.1),  i.e.,  for
each $1 increase in charity donation, participants increase their bids
by  37c.  As  argued  in  Section 3,  this  coefficient  conflates  the  effect
of attention to bidding and participant altruistic concern. In order to
disentangle the two, we can use the coefficient on 𝑠, which is purely
driven by attention (under full attention, the coefficient on 𝑠 should be
1). Looking in Column 1, we see that the sensitivity of bidding to 𝑠 is

.61 (𝑡 = 8.8), consistent with the idea that attention is significant, but
not complete (Charles et al. (2024) find a similar level of attention in
their related experimental set-up). We show in Appendix Figure B.1 that
the relationship between bidding and 𝑠 is close to linear. As a result,
the estimate of the ‘‘net deontological preference’’ 𝛼 − 𝛽 is given by
.37∕.61 = .61: For each $1 of charity donation, the stock-owning utility
of the participant increases by 61c. This is a large effect, presumably
due to the starkness of our experimental set-up.

Columns 2 and 3 test for non-linearity. Consistent with Fig. 1, both
columns  show  some  limited  evidence  of  concavity.  In  column  2,  a
squared term in 𝑠 is significant at 10%. In column 3, negative charity
donations  reduce  bidding  by  46c  per  dollar,  while  positive  charity
donations  increase  it  by  only  28c.  The  difference  is  however,  only
significant at 8%. There is a small indication that prosocial bidding is
asymmetric, consistent with some form of social loss aversion. But since
this effect is weak, we focus on the linear specification in the remainder
of the paper.

5.2.  Pivotal condition: Evidence of no impact-seeking behavior

Our baseline condition only identifies 𝛼 − 𝛽 ≈ .61, as discussed in
Section 3. It indicates that value alignment is an important source of
utility (at least .61), but does not prove that impact-seeking behavior
is absent: It could still be that 𝛽 > 0, i.e. that participants care about
the charity donation even when they do not own the stock.

To separately identify 𝛼 and 𝛽, one needs to compare the pivotal
and the non-pivotal conditions. To the 1461 non-pivotal bids studied
so far, we thus add the 1035 pivotal bids collected in batches 1, 2 and
3. We show in Fig. 2 a binned scatter plot of bids against charity values
for the two conditions separately. As in Fig. 1, these plots control for
the selfish value 𝑠, which is a separate driver of the cross-section of
bids and negatively correlated (by design) with charity donations. As
it clearly appears in the figure, the slopes of pivotal and non-pivotal
conditions are rather similar.

Table 4 runs formal statistical tests. In all columns, we estimate our
empirical specification. Column 1 uses the entire, pooled sample (all
of batches 1,2 and 3). Column 2 focuses on non-pivotal (baseline) bids,
and column 3 on pivotal bids. First focusing on the sensitivity to selfish
value,  we  find  .61  in  the  baseline  vs.  .65  in  the  pivotal  conditions.
The difference in attention is insignificant (p value = .74). Given that

8 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

Fig. 2. Adjusted Bids and Adjusted Charity Values: Pivotal v Baseline.
Note: This figure plots the binned scatter plot and 95% confidence intervals of bids against charity values after controlling for selfish values using the ‘‘binsreg’’ stata package
developed by Cattaneo et al. (2023) The black chart is executed on the ‘‘Baseline’’ treatments (same as in Fig. 1) and the red chart on the ‘‘Pivotal’’ condition. We demean the
variables before constructing the bin scatter plot.

Table 5
Effect of corporate externality on propensity to donate.
(2)

(1)

Total charity value

Constant

Y/N

−.07
(.084)

.24***
(.016)

Amount

.32
(.28)

.82***
(.058)

174

718

0.00

0.01

Observations
R2
Note: The data used here corresponds to the two conditions
with the option to donate: Baseline with donation and pivotal
with  donation.  In  both  regressions,  the  RHS  is  the  sum  of
charity  values  across  all  three  bids.  In  column  1,  the  LHS
variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the participant donates at the
end. In column 2, the LHS is the amount given, conditional on
giving. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the worker
level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

attention is the same in both conditions, we can directly attribute the
difference in sensitivities to 𝑐 to consequentialist preferences (𝛼 ≠ 0). As
previously shown in Table 3, the sensitivity in the non-pivotal condition
is  .37  (𝑡 =  5.1),  versus  .55  (𝑡 =  6.2)  in  the  pivotal  condition.  Both
are strongly significant, but statistically indistinguishable with 𝑝 = .13.
Overall, while there is evidence that 𝛼  > 0 (i.e. investors care about
charity donation even when they do not own the stock), we cannot
reject the hypothesis that 𝛼 = 0 at conventional levels of significance.
Our participants are close to being 100% deontological.

5.3.  Substitution between personal and corporate donation

A  natural  question  is  whether  our  participants  confuse  prosocial
bidding with generosity. For instance, by paying a higher price, they
may be under the impression that they are actually donating the excess
amount (above fundamental value) to the charity — while in reality
they are paying the experimenter. We argue that confusion is unlikely,

Table 6
Sensitivity to option to donate.

Charity value

Selfish value

Constant

LHS: Bid
(1)

Baseline

.51***
(.14)

.86***
(.13)

.11
(.091)

(2)

Baseline
with donation
.33***
(.084)

.54***
(.08)

.33***
(.065)

342

0.06

0.15

.266

1,119

Observations
R2
P-value of equality (Charity value)
P-value of equality (Selfish value)
Note: The LHS is the bid, 𝑏. We regress the bid on the dividend 𝑠 (Selfish value), and
the amount transferred by the charity to the company 𝑐 (Charity value). Column 1
uses the baseline condition (with charity choice and no donation) and column 2 uses
the baseline with donation condition (with charity choice and the donation option). We
report in the second-to-last line the 𝑝-value of the t-test that the regression coefficient on
‘‘Charity value’’ for the ‘‘baseline’’ treatment is equal to the coefficient for the ‘‘baseline
with donation’’ treatment. We report in the last line the 𝑝-value of the t-test that the
regression coefficient on ‘‘Selfish value’’ for the ‘‘baseline’’ treatment is equal to the
coefficient for the ‘‘baseline with donation’’ treatment. Standard errors in parentheses,
clustered at the worker level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

.029

given that participants in the main experiment have to ace the practice
quiz.  That  said,  in  this  section,  we  show  directly  that  they  are  not
confused and that prosocial bidding is indeed an expression of their
deontological preferences.

In Table 5, we focus on the 718 participants who can make dona-
tions, and test if donations respond to the total charity value, which
varies randomly. The RHS variable, Total charity value, is the sum of all
transfers to charity in all three rounds experienced by the participants
(thus, the sum of the donations of the ethical and unethical firms, since
the neutral firm does not donate). Under the null hypothesis of the

9 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Table 7
Robustness to Prolific.

Charity value

Selfish value

Constant

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

MTurk

(1)

Pooled

.57***
(.087)

.77***
(.076)

.14**
(.06)

(2)

Baseline

.51***
(.1)

.78***
(.093)

.13*
(.073)

(3)

Pivotal

.65***
(.16)

.76***
(.13)

.14
(.11)

Prolific

(4)

Pooled

.37***
(.074)

.54***
(.07)

.33***
(.056)

(5)

Baseline

.27***
(.1)

.5***
(.097)

.39***
(.078)

(6)

Pivotal

.49***
(.11)

.59***
(.1)

.26***
(.079)

372

735

0.11

0.10

1,389

1,107

Observations
R2
P-value of equality (Charity value)
P-value of equality (Selfish value)
Note: In all regressions, the LHS is the bid, 𝑏. We regress the bid on the dividend 𝑠 (Selfish value), and the amount transferred by the charity to
the company 𝑐 (Charity value). For Columns (1)–(3), we use the data from the 2019 Amazon MTurk implementation, and Columns (4)–(6) show
the data from the 2022 and 2023 Prolific implementations. Columns (2) and (5) shows the baseline (nonpivotal) treatment. Columns (3) and (6)
shows the pivotal treatment. and Columns (1) and (3) shows the nonpivotal and pivotal treatments combined. We report in the second-to-last
line the 𝑝-value of the t-test that the regression coefficient on ‘‘Charity value’’ for the ‘‘baseline’’ treatment is equal to the coefficient for the
‘‘pivotal’’ treatment. We conduct this separately for the MTurk sample and for the Prolific sample. We do the same t-test in the last line for
the coefficient on Selfish value. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the worker level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

.464

0.09

0.06

0.06

0.06

.138

.507

726

663

.9

model in Section 3, corporate donation and participant donation are
separable and additive, so that the expected coefficient is zero.

In Column (1), the LHS variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the partic-
ipant donates at all, and zero otherwise. In column (2), we look at the
intensive margin: The amount donated conditional on donating (hence
the  smaller  number  of  observations).  In  both  cases,  the  correlation
with total firm prosocial behavior (Total Charity Value) is insignificant.
Thus, the WTP for virtuous stocks is not crowded out by the possibility
to donate directly.

Table 6 is a second test of this potential substitution, which is based
on comparing the amount of prosocial bidding in conditions where do-
nation is allowed, or not. Columns 1 and 2 thus compare the estimates
of Eq. (3) in conditions where participants are allowed to donate, and
conditions where they are not. To make things comparable, we focus
on the non-pivotal/baseline condition, since this is the only bidding
condition for which we have a configuration without donation. Column
1  has  114  participants  (baseline,  no  donation),  while  column  2  has
373 (baseline, donation). Prosocial bidding is strong and statistically
significant in both conditions, but the difference in sensitivity to the
charity  donation  is  insignificant  (p-value=.27).  This  confirms  results
from Table  5 that  participants  view  the  decision  to  donate  and  the
decision to ‘‘reward’’ pro-social companies as unrelated to one another.

6.  Robustness

6.1.  Sample splits

We first test the robustness of our results by comparing results in
MTurk (batch 1) to results in Prolific (Batches 2 and 3). A possible
concern with our MTurk participants is that they are not representative
of the population of investors. They tend to be less wealthy and less
well financially educated. To partially address this, we use evidence
from  Prolific,  a  platform  that  allows  to  restrict  survey  participation
to subcategories of people. We focus on (1) college graduates and (2)
people  who  have  access  to  a  stock  trading  platform.  None  of  these
two demographics are actually verified by the company, but we are
hoping  the  fraction  of  college  graduates  and  stock  traders  is  larger
in our Prolific samples than in our MTurk batch. Table 7 reports the
results of our main specification on both samples separately, focusing
on pooled conditions (columns 1 and 4), baseline conditions (columns
2  and  5)  and  pivotal  conditions  (columns  3  and  6).  In  spite  of  the
fact  that  reported  college  education  and  stock  ownership  are  more
prevalent in Prolific (see Table 2), both subgroups yield the same result:
prosocial bidding is strongly significant and large for both pivotal and

10 

non-pivotal conditions, and the difference is statistically insignificant,
indicating almost pure deontological preferences. We note that Prolific
participants tend to be slightly more sensitive to impact, however, sug-
gesting that education and stock ownership may tilt (in an insignificant
way) towards consequentialism.

We  explore  further  sample  splits  in Table  8.  Panel  A  focuses  on
self-reported education. Consistent with our MTurk/Prolific split, we
find  some  limited  evidence  that  education  tilts  individuals  towards
more consequentialism. While prosocial bidding does not depend on
pivotality for high-school graduates, all of them from Mturk, (𝑝 = .896),
there is a marginally significant difference among college graduates,
coming both from MTurk and Prolific (charity sensitivity of .55 vs .33,
with 𝑝 = .082). Panel B splits by gender, and we find no difference
between male and female participants: Both exhibit pure deontolog-
ical  preferences.  Finally,  panel  C  splits  by  number  of  practice  quiz
attempts, as a proxy for attention. Consistent with expectations, the
sensitivity to selfish value, which measures attention in our model (it
should be 1 if participants are fully attentive), is higher for participants
who passed the quiz in the first attempt. The difference is, however,
statistically insignificant. Consistent with stronger attention, prosocial
bidding appears a bit stronger (but again not significantly so) for the
most attentive participants. In both cases, there is no real difference
between the pivotal and non-pivotal treatments.

Overall,  sample  splits  confirm  the  prevalence  of  value  alignment
across sub-populations. There is slight evidence of some impact-seeking
motive among more educated participants, but even there, the differ-
ence between pivotal and non-pivotal conditions is small.

6.2.  Larger stakes

In this last robustness check, we explore the impact of larger stakes.
We show the results in Table 9, and report our main results on our
pooled sample in columns 1–3 (the same ones as in Table 4). In columns
4–6, we rerun the same regressions, but on the separate sample where
stakes are multiplied by 5 (see Section 4 for a detailed description).
The table makes it clear that there is no difference in prosocial bidding
between regular and large stakes. The sensitivity of bidding to charity
is hovers between 0.4 and 0.5, and is not statistically different between
non-pivotal  and  pivotal  conditions.  The  sensitivity  to  selfish  value,
which captures equation in Eqs. (1) and (2) is also similar (around .6),
indicating that the level of attention also does not depend on the size
of stakes.

There  is,  however,  a  large  difference  in  the  constant,  and  this
justifies our choice to not pool larger stakes with batches 1–3 in our

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Table 8
Heterogeneity by characteristics.
Panel A: Education

Charity value

Selfish value

Constant

Observations
R2
P-value of equality (Charity value)
P-value of equality (Selfish value)
Panel B: Gender

Charity value

Selfish value

Constant

Observations
R2
P-value of equality (Charity value)
P-value of equality (Selfish value)
Panel C: Practice Quiz Attempts

Charity value

Selfish value

Constant

High School or Less
(1)

(2)

Pooled

.59***
(.14)

.78***
(.13)

.11
(.1)

462

0.09

Male

(1)

Pooled

.45***
(.073)

.69***
(.067)

.22***
(.053)

1,515

0.09

Baseline

.59***
(.2)

.84***
(.18)

.071
(.15)

276

0.10

(2)

Baseline

.37***
(.097)

.67***
(.092)

.25***
(.074)

843

0.10

.896

.527

.236

.714

Passed in First Attempt
(2)
(1)

Pooled

.53***
(.087)

.69***
(.079)

.19***
(.062)

Baseline

.47***
(.12)

.7***
(.12)

.2**
(.09)

(3)

Pivotal

.56***
(.17)

.68***
(.16)

.18
(.12)

186

0.09

(3)

Pivotal

.55***
(.11)

.72***
(.098)

.19**
(.077)

672

0.09

(3)

Pivotal

.58***
(.12)

.69***
(.11)

.17**
(.082)

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

College or Higher
(4)

Pooled

.42***
(.062)

.6***
(.057)

.28***
(.045)

2,034

0.07

Female

(4)

Pooled

.45***
(.09)

.54***
(.084)

.3***
(.067)

981

0.05

(5)

Baseline

.33***
(.077)

.57***
(.074)

.32***
(.059)

1,185

0.08

(5)

Baseline

.37***
(.11)

.54***
(.1)

.32***
(.082)

618

0.05

.082

.526

.272

.998

Passed in Subsequent Attempt
(4)

(5)

Pooled

.4***
(.074)

.59***
(.07)

.29***
(.056)

Baseline

.32***
(.091)

.57***
(.086)

.32***
(.069)

(6)

Pivotal

.55***
(.1)

.65***
(.091)

.22***
(.071)

849

0.06

(6)

Pivotal

.58***
(.16)

.54***
(.14)

.26**
(.11)

363

0.04

(6)

Pivotal

.52***
(.13)

.61***
(.12)

.25***
(.093)

477

906

0.09

Observations
R2
P-value of equality (Charity value)
P-value of equality (Selfish value)
Note: In all regressions, the LHS is the bid, 𝑏. We regress the bid on the dividend 𝑠 (Selfish value), and the amount transferred by the charity to the company 𝑐 (Charity value). All
three panels use the main experiment data (Batches 1–3). Columns (1) and (4) shows the nonpivotal and pivotal treatments combined. Columns (2) and (5) show the nonpivotal
treatment, and Columns (3) and (6) show the pivotal treatments. We split the sample to show how the pass-through varies by education (Panel A), gender (Panel B), and practice
quiz attempts (Panel C). We report in the second-to-last line of each panel the 𝑝-value of the t-test that the regression coefficient on ‘‘Charity value’’ for the ‘‘baseline’’ treatment
is equal to the coefficient for the ‘‘pivotal’’ treatment. We do the same t-test in the last line for the coefficient on Selfish value. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at
the worker level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

1,590

0.09

0.09

0.06

0.07

0.06

.202

.766

429

984

606

.52

.96

analysis. Going back to Eqs. (1) and (2), the constant of the regression
is equal to (1 −𝜆)̄𝑏, where 𝜆 is the attention parameter and ̄𝑏 is a scaling
parameter that is left unmodeled. Given similar 𝜆 in columns 1–3 and
4–6, evidence from the Table suggests that ̄𝑏 is much larger (4–5 times)
when stakes are larger. This is expected, as the participants’ anchor
should be proportional to the order of magnitudes of payoffs, which
are five times larger in the large stake condition. While this difference
in the constant can be understood, it prevents us from running a single
regression on a completely pooled sample made of the three batches
and the large stakes condition. It would induce an upward bias in the
coefficients, as 𝑐 and 𝑠 are positively correlated with the constant in
the super pooled sample.

7.  Conclusion

To  what  extent  do  shareholders  value  ethical  behavior?  In  this
paper, we develop a theoretical framework and an experimental design

to  investigate  this  question.  We  present  an  online  experiment  that
allows  participants  to  submit  bids  for  companies  that  vary  by  how
much money they add to, or subtract from, a fund that will be donated
to  charity.  This  design  allows  us  to  isolate  the  impact  of  a  firm’s
externalities on investor bids, a feature that is difficult to achieve out-
side an experimental setting. We find strong evidence that individuals
incorporate a large portion of this charity externality in their bids. More
importantly, participants exhibit value-alignment, in the sense that they
only care about charity donations when they own the stock, and not if
they don’t. We find little evidence of impact-seeking motives.

To further learn about investors’ moral preferences, our experimen-
tal set-up could be extended in several directions. For instance, one
could explore the determinants of deontological preferences: it could
be that some causes, or other forms of corporate externalities (say, pol-
lution instead of donations), are more likely to trigger consequentialist
thinking.  Also,  one  could  ask  how  much  the  (non-consequentialist)
willingness  to  pay  depends  on  the  efficiency  of  charities  receiving
money. We leave these leads for future research.

11 

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Table 9
Robustness to larger stakes.

Charity value

Selfish value

Constant

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

Regular stakes
(1)

Pooled

.45***
(.057)

.63***
(.053)

.25***
(.042)

(2)

Baseline

.37***
(.073)

.61***
(.069)

.28***
(.055)

(3)

Pivotal

.55***
(.089)

.65***
(.081)

.22***
(.064)

Larger stakes
(4)

Pooled

.44***
(.099)

.64***
(.086)

1.1***
(.33)

(5)

Baseline

.3*
(.16)

.53***
(.14)

1.8***
(.54)

(6)

Pivotal

.56***
(.11)

.72***
(.093)

.5
(.34)

735

0.07

0.08

0.07

1,035

1,461

2,496

Observations
R2
P-value of equality (Charity value)
P-value of equality (Selfish value)
Note: In all regressions, the LHS is the bid, 𝑏. We regress the bid on the dividend 𝑠 (Selfish value), and the amount transferred by the charity
to the company 𝑐 (Charity value).For Columns (1)–(3), we use the main experiment data used throughout the paper. Columns (4)–(6) use the
data from the May 2023 treatment with larger stakes, where all parameters were multiplied by 5. Columns (2) and (5) shows the baseline
(nonpivotal) treatment. Columns (3) and (6) shows the pivotal treatment. and Columns (1) and (3) shows the nonpivotal and pivotal treatments
combined. We report in the second-to-last line the 𝑝-value of the t-test that the regression coefficient on ‘‘Charity value’’ for the ‘‘baseline’’
treatment is equal to the coefficient for the ‘‘pivotal’’ treatment. We conduct this separately for the main sample and for the ‘large stakes’
robustness sample. We do the same t-test in the last line for the coefficient on Selfish value. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the
worker level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

.126

0.09

0.07

0.14

.749

.175

.253

348

387

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jean-François Bonnefon: Writing – original draft. Augustin Landier:

Writing  –  original  draft. Parinitha  Sastry: Writing  –  original  draft.
David Thesmar: Writing – original draft.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment

Landier  acknowledges  research  funding  from  Fondation  Bank  de

France and ADEME.

Appendix A.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103955.

Data availability

Moral Preferences of Investors : Experimental Evidence -- Replication
Package (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Barber, Brad, Morse, Adair, Asuda, Ayako, 2020. Impact investing. J. Financ. Econ..
Bartling,  Björn,  Weber,  Roberto  A.,  Yao,  Lan,  2014.  Do  markets  erode  social

responsibility? Q. J. Econ. 130 (1), 219–266.

Becker, Gordon M., Degroot, Morris M., Marshak, Jason, 1964. Measuring utility by a

single-response sequential method. Behav. Sci. 9 (3).

Berk,  Jonathan,  van  Binsbergen,  Jules  H.,  2021.  The  impact  of  impact  investing.

Available at SSRN 3909166.

Bolton,  Patrick,  Li,  Tao,  Ravina,  Enrichetta,  Rosenthal,  Howard  L,  2019.  Investor

Ideology. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Broccardo, Eleonora, Hart, Oliver D., Zingales, Luigi, 2020. Exit vs. Voice. Technical

Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Brodback, Daniel, Guenster, Nadja, Pouget, Sébastien, 2019. The valuation of corporate

social responsiblity: An experiment. SSRN Working Paper 4260824.

Cattaneo,  Matias  D.,  Crump,  Richard  K.,  Farrell,  Max  H.,  Feng,  Yingjie,  2023.  On

binscatter.

12 

Charles, Constantin, Frydman, Cary, Kilic, Mete, 2024. Insensitive investors. J. Finance

79 (4), 2473–2503.

Crockett, Molly J., Siegel, Jenifer Z., Kurth-Nelson, Zeb, Dayan, Peter, Dolan, Ray-
mond J., 2017. Moral transgressions corrupt neural representations of value. Nat.
Neurosci. 20 (6), 879–885.

Derwall, Jeroen, Koedijk, Kees, Ter Horst, Jenke, 2011. A tale of values-driven and

profit-seeking social investors. J. Bank. Financ. 35 (8), 2137–2147.

Douglas, Benjamin, Ewell, Patrick, Brauer, Markus, 2023. Data quality in online human
subjects research: Comparisons between MTurk, Prolific, CloudResearch, qualtrics,
and SONA. PLoS One 1–17.

Edmans,  Alex,  2011.  Does  the  stock  market  fully  value  intangibles?  Employee

satisfaction and equity prices. J. Financ. Econ. 101 (3), 621–640.

Elfenbein,  Daniel  W.,  McManus,  Brian,  2010.  A  greater  price  for  a  greater  good?
Evidence that consumers pay more for charity-linked products. Am. Econ. J.: Econ.
Policy 2 (2), 28–60.

Falk, Armin, Szech, Nora, 2013. Morals and markets. Science 340 (6133), 707–711.
Federsen,  Thimothy,  Gailmard,  Sean,  Sadroni,  Alvaro,  2009.  Moral  bias  in  large

elections: Theory and experimental evidence. Am. Political Sci. Rev.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2019. Behavioral inattention. In: Handbook of Behavioral Economics:

Applications and Foundations 1, vol. 2, Elsevier, pp. 261–343.

Gollier, Christian, Pouget, Sébastien, 2014. The ‘‘washing machine’’: Investment strate-
gies  and  corporate  behavior  with  socially  responsible  investors.  TSE  Working
Paper.

Green, Daniel, Roth, Benjamin, 2021. The allocation of socially responsible capital.

Available at SSRN 3737772.

Hart, Oliver, Zingales, Luigi, 2017. Companies should maximize shareholder welfare

not market value. J. Law Finance Account. 2 (2), 247–274.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., Sussman, Abigail B., 2019. Do investors value sustainability? A

natural experiment examining ranking and fund flows. J. Finance.

Heeb, Florian, Kölbel, Julian F., Paetzold, Falko, Zeisberger, Stefan, 2022. Do investors

care about impact? Available at SSRN 3765659.

Heinkel, Robert, Kraus, Alan, Zechner, Josef, 2001. The effect of green investment on

corporate behavior. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 36 (4), 431–449.

Hong, Harrison, Kacperczyk, Marcin, 2009. The price of sin: The effects of social norms

on markets. J. Financ. Econ. 93 (1), 15–36.

Humphrey, Jacquelyn, Kogan, Shimon, Sagi, Jacob, Starks, Laura, 2021. The Asym-
metry in Responsible Investing Preferences. Technical Report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Krüger, Philipp, 2015. Corporate goodness and shareholder wealth. J. Financ. Econ.

115 (2), 304–329.

Landier, Augustin, Lovo, Stefano, 2020. ESG investing: How to optimize impact? HEC

Paris Research Paper No. FIN-2020-1363.

Leszczyc, Peter T.L. Popkowski, Rothkopf, Michael H., 2010. Charitable motives and

bidding in charity auctions. Manage. Sci. 56 (3), 399–413.

Margolis, Joshua D., Elfenbein, Hillary Anger, Walsh, James P., 2011. Does it pay to
be good? A meta-analysis and redirection of research on the relationship between
corporate social and financial performance. Research Paper available on SSRN.
Oehmke, Martin, Opp, Marcus M., 2020. A theory of socially responsible investment.

CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP14351.

Ottoni-Wilhelm, Mark, Vesterlund, Lise, Xie, Huan, 2017. Why do people give? Testing

pure and impure altruism. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (11), 3617–3633.

J.-F. Bonnefon et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 163 (2025) 103955 

Pástor, Luboš, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian A., 2021. Sustainable investing in

Singer, Peter, 2016. The Most Good You Can Do: How Effective Altruism Is Changing

equilibrium. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 550–571.

Pedersen,  Lasse  Heje,  Fitzgibbons,  Shaun,  Pomorski,  Lukasz,  2021.  Responsible

investing: The ESG-efficient frontier. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 572–597.

Riedl, Arno, Smeets, Paul, 2017. Why do investors hold socially responsible mutual

funds? J. Finance 72 (6), 2505–2550.

Ideas About Living Ethically. Yale University Press.

Tasimi, Arber, Gross, James J., 2020. The dilemma of dirty money. Curr. irections

Tasimi,  Arber,  Wynn,  Karen,  2016.  Costly  rejection  of  wrongdoers  by  infants  and

Psychol. Sci.

children. Cognition 151, 76–79.

Sandel, Michael J., 2007. Justice: A Reader. Oxford University Press on Demand.
Sandel,  Michael  J.,  2012.  What  Money  Can’t  Buy:  The  Moral  Limits  of  Markets.

Zerbib,  Olivier  David,  2020.  A  sustainable  capital  asset  pricing  model  (S-CAPM):
Evidence from green investing and sin stock exclusion. Available at SSRN 3455090.

Macmillan.

13 

