Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Associative memory, beliefs and market interactions✩
Benjamin Enke a,b, Frederik Schwerter c,d, Florian Zimmermann e,f,∗
a Harvard University, United States of America
b NBER, United States of America
c Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, Germany
d University of Cologne, Germany
e University of Bonn, Germany
f IZA, Germany

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Recent theories and narratives highlight the potential role of associative recall in driving overreaction in
expectations and market behavior. Based on a simple model, we test this idea through a series of experiments in
which news are communicated with memorable contexts. Because the experimental participants predominantly
remember those past news that get cued by new information, their beliefs about fundamentals strongly
overreact. In a betting market experiment, associative recall translates into overreaction in market prices,
which makes realized prices too extreme. Our results highlight the importance of associative memory for
beliefs and financial decisions.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/545wb2gnd7/1

JEL classification:
D01

Keywords:
Beliefs
Expectations
Memory
Associations
Bounded rationality

1. Introduction

Expectations play a crucial role in financial decision making. In
recent years, a growing literature has documented that investors’ ex-
pectations (i) strongly predict investment behavior (e.g., Beutel and
Weber, 2022; Giglio et al., 2021); yet (ii) often appear at odds with
the rational expectations assumption (e.g., Greenwood and Shleifer,
2014; Bordalo et al., 2020a). These results have raised the question
which psychological primitives researchers in economics and finance
should incorporate into theoretical models and empirical applications
to account for deviations from the rational benchmark. As part of
this movement, investors’ memory has attracted interest because the
abundance of financial information makes it implausible that investors

accurately recall all relevant news (e.g., Charles, 2022a,b; Jiang et al.,
2023; Afrouzi et al., 2023; Malmendier and Wachter, 2021).1

A hallmark result in memory research in psychology is that recall is
associative in nature, meaning that people are more likely to remember
past information that is similar to new information.2 Formal economic
theories and popular financial narratives – discussed below – argue that
the associative nature of memory could generate systematic overreaction
of expectations and market behavior (Shiller, 2017, 2019; Gennaioli
and Shleifer, 2018). The main idea is that financial information can
have both a direct and an indirect ‘‘cueing’’ effect on expectations.
The direct effect is standard: upon receiving relevant news, investors
update their beliefs. The indirect memory-based effect emerges because

✩

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank him, an associate editor and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. We also thank Pedro
Bordalo, Kai Barron, Katie Coffman, Ernst Fehr, Nicola Gennaioli, Thomas Graeber, Alex Imas, Botond Koszegi, Ryan Oprea, Chris Roth, Peter Schwardmann,
Josh Schwartzstein, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Yves le Yaouanq, and seminar audiences at Bergen, Chicago Booth, Cologne, Copenhagen, Davis, Innsbruck,
Maastricht, München, Münster, Wien, Zurich, the 2019 CESifo Behavioral Economics conference in Munich, and the 2021 Beliefs, Narratives, and Memory
workshop in Riederau for valuable comments. Schwerter thanks the Sloan Foundation for post-doctoral funding. This project has received funding from the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ERC Starting Grant: 948424 - MEMEB).
Funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), Germany through CRC TR 224 (Project A01) and under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - EXC 2126/1 -
390838866 is gratefully acknowledged. All experiments in this paper were pre-registered in the AEA RCT Registry as AEARCTR-0009215.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: enke@fas.harvard.edu (B. Enke), f.schwerter@fs.de (F. Schwerter), florian.zimmermann@iza.org (F. Zimmermann).

1 Stefan Nagel, for instance, surmises that ‘‘[m]ore research, both empirically and theoretically, is needed to better understand investors’ formation of memory’’,

see Brunnermeier et al. (2021).

2 See Baddeley et al. (2020), Schacter (2008), Kahana (2012).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103853
Received 4 October 2023; Received in revised form 11 April 2024; Accepted 15 April 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103853Availableonline7May20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).B. Enke et al.

financial information is often embedded in contextual features such as
stories, narratives and images. Given the associative nature of memory,
these strong contextual elements can induce investors to reconstruct
past information in a biased way, by asymmetrically retrieving those
past news that are similar to today’s news. For example, when investors
are exposed to ‘‘good-times narratives’’ or images of bulls and upward-
sloping trend lines, this may lead them to asymmetrically remember
positive events from the past. As a consequence of this asymmetric
recall, information and its associated contextual features can have an
additional, indirect effect that could lead expectations to look like they
overreact to news.

Despite the increasing theoretical interest in memory and its intu-
itive importance for expectation formation, clean evidence on its role
for financial decisions is limited. A major hurdle in studying the role of
associative recall is that it is difficult to causally identify the indirect
‘‘cueing’’ effects of narratives or images. The reason is that contextual
features like stories are generally correlated with objective information,
which makes it difficult to infer whether an expectations revision is
actually driven by the indirect (cueing) effect of a narrative or by the
standard direct effect of information. In laboratory experiments, on the
other hand, objective information and contextual features that trigger
recall can be decoupled and exogenously varied.

We, hence, implement controlled lab experiments to study the role
of associative recall for expectation formation and market behavior.
Our experiments are tightly organized around the predictions of a sim-
ple formal framework that applies the idea of associative recall to belief
formation, following models such as Mullainathan (2002), Wachter and
Kahana (2019) and Bordalo et al. (2020b). The model transparently
spells out how the direct and indirect effects of information can interact
to produce overreaction. In the context of a simple experimental asset
pricing experiment, we obtain two key results. First, we show that asso-
ciative recall causes predictable overreaction to financial news. Direct
recall measures confirm that this result is indeed driven by associative
memory. Second, using a betting market experiment, we document that
associations-driven overreaction in beliefs translates into overreaction
in market prices, even when people have an opportunity to fully or
partially select out of the market.

Experimental design.
In our experiment, participants form beliefs about
whether each of multiple hypothetical companies is ‘‘good’’ or ‘‘bad’’.
The experiment comprises two periods that we think of as ‘‘past’’ and
‘‘present’’. Across both periods, a subject sequentially observes noisy
binary signals that are informative about a company’s true quality.
These news are communicated in a context, which consists of a story
(narrative) and an image that relate to the news. For example, for
one company, a positive signal would be shown with an intrinsically
uninformative story about the company having launched a successful
advertisement campaign with a celebrity, accompanied by a picture
of that celebrity. A key feature of our experimental implementation
– that is difficult to achieve with observational data – is that the
contextual cues are transparently uninformative (conditional on the
signal realization). This allows us to identify the indirect memory-
driven ‘‘cueing’’ effect of information, above and beyond the objective
informational content of the signals.

Subjects’ financial incentives are such that their second-period be-
liefs about a company’s quality should incorporate both first- and
second-period signals. Our main object of interest is whether subjects
overreact to the second-period signal due to the logic of associative
recall.

We deploy two types of random variation to causally identify the
role of associative recall. First, we manipulate the scope for associa-
tive memory in a within-subjects treatment variation. Each subject
forms beliefs about each of 14 companies, seven of which belong to
treatment Cue and seven of which belong to treatment NoCue. For
companies in treatment Cue, identical news are embedded in iden-
tical contexts. In other words, for each company in treatment Cue,

all positive news are communicated with the same context, and all
negative news are communicated with the same context. Thus, in this
treatment, the second-period signal could cue the asymmetric retrieval
of identical first-period signals. While it is rarely the case that real
market participants experience multiple signals in exactly the same
context, this simple setup is reflective of many applications in which
similar signals are consistently associated with similar contexts. For
example, whenever good news prevail in the stock market, people are
disproportionately exposed to bulls, upward-sloping trend lines, and
good-times stories.

For companies in treatment NoCue, on the other hand, each signal
is communicated with a different context. Thus, subjects never observe
the same story or image twice. As a result, the scope for associative
recall is exogenously reduced.

A second dimension of random variation is that, within treatment
Cue, the number of first-period signals that equal the second-period
signal (the number of signals that ‘‘get cued’’) differs randomly across
subjects and companies. This is relevant because our stylized model
predicts that overreaction of second-period beliefs should systemati-
cally depend on the number of cued first-period signals, even though –
conditional on first-period beliefs – the signal history is irrelevant from
a normative perspective.

Results. We report two main results. First, second-period beliefs over-
react substantially to the second-period signal in Cue, an effect that is
not present in NoCue. This identifies a causal effect of the presence
of (normatively irrelevant) contextual associations on overreaction.
Second, as predicted by the model, the magnitude of overreaction
strongly increases in the number of first-period signals that get cued
by the second-period signal. Thus, associations cause overreaction, and
this overreaction is history-dependent in specific ways predicted by
models of associative recall.

Our interpretation of this overreaction is that subjects asymmetri-
cally remember those first-period signals that equal the second-period
one. We confirm this by implementing a second experiment in which
we directly elicit people’s recall in an incentivized fashion.

Market experiments. Almost all of the narratives on the role of asso-
ciative recall for financial decisions that motivate our paper concern
market behavior, rather than purely individual decision making. This
raises the question whether associations-driven overreaction in beliefs
indeed potentially also impacts market behavior. One widely-discussed
reason why this need not be the case is potential self-selection: people’s
expectations may overreact, but perhaps those people who succumb to
associative recall and overreaction would never actually bet on these
beliefs in a market context because they are loosely aware of their
fallibility. Yet, the psychological literature provides little empirical
guidance on whether we should expect people with stronger associative
memory to act less aggressively on their beliefs.

To study this, we embed our individual belief elicitation paradigm
into a parimutuel betting market experiment that is frequently used
by experimental researchers due to its resemblance to real financial
markets. In this market, groups of three subjects each receive public
signals about a company’s value and then place bets on whether the
company is good or bad. The parimutuel price mechanism redistributes
the money bet among the market participants according to whose bet
was right and the amount of money bet. A crucial feature of this market
is that subjects can self-select in or out in a continuous fashion, by
choosing the total amount of money they would like to bet.

Despite this potential for self-selection, we find that market prices
react about twice as strongly to information when associative recall is
facilitated compared to when associations are experimentally removed.
As a result, just like memorable contexts induce individual beliefs
to be too extreme, they also lead market prices to be too high (too
low) following a positive (negative) signal. Indeed, we find that the
magnitude of associations-driven overreaction in market prices is very
similar to the magnitude of overreaction in beliefs.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038532B. Enke et al.

External relevance. Our experiments provide evidence that the associa-
tive nature of recall is a sufficiently hard-wired psychological process
that it even affects people’s financial information processing in un-
familiar online environments like ours. Given the pervasiveness of
images, narratives and stories in financial information, we conjecture
that the mechanism we identify here is also at play outside of the lab.
In some situations, the contextual features in which financial news
are embedded might serve as cues that trigger recall, for instance
upward-sloping trend lines or pictures of bulls. In other situations,
financial news may come in the form of narratives (e.g., ‘‘crypto is the
future’’, ‘‘climate risks are underpriced’’), which then trigger the recall
of similar narratives from the past. Relatedly, Charles (2022b) proposes
earnings announcements as memory-relevant cues, whereas Jiang et al.
(2023) emphasize the role of recent returns. More generally, various
scholars have recently argued that the broad idea of associations-
driven overreaction may be a driver of aggregate financial events.
For example, in influential writings on the role of narratives, Shiller
and co-authors appeal to the role of associative recall for expectation
formation and overreaction in financial markets by observing that
‘‘[o]ne new narrative may remind of another that has been lying fairly
dormant. . . there is cue-dependent forgetting’’ (Shiller, 2017, p. 975,
also see Shiller, 2019, Goetzmann et al., 2022). Similarly, Gennaioli
and Shleifer (2018) treatment asserts that associative memory may
underlie overreaction to news in the context of the 2007–2008 financial
crisis. More generally, overreaction has been argued to be a key pat-
tern in the processing of financial and macroeconomic news (Bordalo
et al., 2020a; Beutel and Weber, 2022), yet the sources that potentially
underlie such overreaction are not well-understood.

Contribution and related literature. Overall, our contribution to the lit-
erature is (i) to provide evidence that associative recall shapes the
formation of expectations; (ii) that this produces systematic overre-
action; and (iii) that this affects experimental market prices, despite
strong scope for self-selection. These results tie into a growing theory
literature that has argued for the importance of associative mem-
ory for economics and finance (Mullainathan, 2002; Bordalo et al.,
2020b, 2023; Wachter and Kahana, 2019; Bodoh-Creed, 2020). On
the experimental side, there is a large psychology literature but scant
evidence from economic or financial decision problems.3 Psychological
experiments have at least two features that make them less-than-
directly applicable to the questions that we are interested in here.
First, these experiments are generally pure recall tasks that do not in-
volve information-processing, belief updating or overreaction. Second,
psychologists have not paid attention to how associative recall affects
market behavior. In economics, a small number of lab experimental
papers provide evidence on the role of memory imperfections for belief
formation in economic or financial decision tasks (Afrouzi et al., 2023;
Bordalo et al., 2023; Graeber et al., 2023). Our contribution to this line
of work is to document how associative recall produces overreaction in
expectations, and that these effects persist in markets with scope for
self-selection.4

Some recent observational and survey studies also provide field
evidence suggesting that associative memory is a driver of investment
behavior (Charles, 2022a,b; Jiang et al., 2023). These studies provide
complementary evidence to our causally identified experiments – by
their very nature, they offer more ecological validity but do not afford

3 In a canonical psychological task on associative recall, subjects are asked
to memorize words, and are subsequently more likely to remember a word
if it was shown in conjunction with another word that is currently being
displayed (see Schacter, 2008; Kahana, 2012, for overviews). As we review in
Section 3.5 and Online Appendix A, our experimental design applies a variant
of canonical psychological paradigms to financial decision tasks.

4 Other recent lab experimental work in behavioral finance on belief
updating includes Hartzmark et al. (2021), Charles et al. (2024), Augenblick
et al. (2023).

the possibility to directly and exogenously manipulate the presence of
associations and, hence, offer less control in identifying memory effects.
Our paper also links to the voluminous literature on experience
effects (e.g., Malmendier and Nagel, 2015; D’Acunto et al., 2021).
A plausible interpretation of this literature is that past experiences
matter mostly when they get cued by current events, which is the
mechanism that we emphasize here. In fact, Malmendier (2021) argues
that ‘‘experiences in one setting (say, the stock market) affect beliefs
and future risk-taking specifically in that setting (stock investment),
but not necessarily in related settings, such as other asset markets
(e.g. the bond market), even if the realizations of the underlying
stochastic processes are correlated’’, which highlights the potential role
of associative memory for experience effects.

Finally, our experiments are related to the active literature that
documents overreaction in survey expectations about financial and
macroeconomic variables (e.g., Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014; Bordalo
et al., 2020a; Barrero, 2022; Beutel and Weber, 2022). While over-
reaction is an oft-emphasized phenomenon in the finance literature,
much other work has provided evidence for underreaction to news (e.g.
Abarbanell and Bernard, 1992; Bouchaud et al., 2019; Bordalo et al.,
2020a), including in laboratory experiments and surveys (Benjamin,
2018).

Recent work suggests that underreaction largely arises when the
information people receive is relatively precise (Augenblick et al.,
2023; Ba et al., 2023), in no small part because people who exhibit
high cognitive uncertainty tend to form beliefs that exhibit regression
towards a prior (Enke and Graeber, 2023). We suspect that the relative
strength of under- and overreaction in any given context will depend
on the relative importance of associative recall (more overreaction)
and complexity-driven underreaction. For instance, in those laboratory
experiments that document underreaction, memory imperfections are
by design ruled out, hence leaving no role for memory-induced over-
reaction. On the other hand, we work with relatively imprecise and
simple signals, leaving little room for complexity-based underreaction.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 offers a
stylized formal framework that motivates the experimental design and
structures the analysis. Section 3 describes the experimental design and
pre-registration. Sections 4 and 5 present the results of the individual
belief elicitation and market experiments. Section 6 concludes.

2. Theoretical framework

2.1. Setup

This section presents a stylized model to guide the design of the
experiments and to structure the empirical analysis. The mechanics of
the model build on some of the formulations in Mullainathan (2002)
and Bordalo et al. (2020b, 2023). The framework rests on two key
assumptions: (i) people may forget prior knowledge, so that they need
to reconstruct it from memory; and (ii) this recollection process is
subject to associative recall.

Consider a decision-maker (DM) who forms beliefs about the value
of an asset 𝜃 with possible states denoted by 𝜃 = 𝐺(ood) and 𝜃 = 𝐵(ad).
The prior probability is 𝑃 (𝐺) = 𝑃 (𝐵) = 0.5. The DM receives a series
of i.i.d. binary signals 𝑠𝑥 that take on the realizations 𝑝(ositive) and
𝑛(egative). The signal diagnosticity is given by 𝑃 (𝑝|𝐺) = 𝑃 (𝑛|𝐵) =
𝑞 > 0.5. In what follows, we will use the terms ‘‘news’’ and ‘‘signal’’
interchangeably. With a slight abuse of notation, we will write 𝑠𝑥 = 1
for positive and 𝑠𝑥 = −1 for negative signals.

There are two periods. In the first (‘‘past’’), the DM receives po-
tentially multiple signals, 𝑠1, … , 𝑠𝑘. Denote by 𝑁𝑝 and 𝑁𝑛 the num-
ber of positive and negative first-period signals. In the second period
(‘‘present’’), the DM receives one additional signal, 𝑠𝑘+1. We call a first-
period signal 𝑠𝑥 congruent with the second-period signal if 𝑠𝑥 = 𝑠𝑘+1. It
is helpful to introduce a shorthand for the number of first-period signals
that are congruent with the second-period signal: 𝑧 ∶= ∑𝑘

.

𝑥=1 1𝑠𝑥=𝑠𝑘+1

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038533B. Enke et al.

We assume that each signal 𝑠𝑥 is experienced in a context, 𝑐𝑥. By
context we mean all environmental features that co-occur with a sig-
nal, except the signal realization itself. Loosely speaking, contexts are
characterized by two aspects. First, conditional on the signal, they are
uncorrelated with the state, meaning that they are intrinsically unin-
formative. Second, contexts are memorable in the sense that observing
them today reminds people of occurrences of the same environmental
features in the past.

We introduce two different counterfactual conditions (that will
correspond to experimental treatment conditions), across which the
mapping between signals and contexts differs. First, in a Cue condition
(T = 1), there is a one-to-one mapping between type of news (positive
or negative) and context: 𝑐𝑥 = 𝑐𝑦 ⇔ 𝑠𝑥 = 𝑠𝑦. Thus, all positive news
appear in the same context and all negative news in the same (yet
different) context. Second, in a NoCue condition (T = 0), the same
≠
context never appears twice, regardless of the signal realizations: 𝑐𝑥
𝑐𝑦 ∀𝑥, 𝑦. We say that a first-period signal gets ‘‘cued’’ by a second-period
signal when both the signals and the contexts are identical.

2.2. Memory and beliefs

First-period beliefs. Denote by 𝑏𝑡(𝐺|𝑆𝑡) the DM’s posterior belief in
period 𝑡 that the state is good, following signal history 𝑆𝑡. By stan-
dard arguments, the first-period Bayesian posterior belief odds can be
expressed as a function of the likelihood ratio and the prior odds:

)(∑𝑘

( 𝑞

=

1 − 𝑞

𝑥=1 𝑠𝑥) 𝑝(𝐺)
𝑝(𝐵)

𝑏1(𝐺|𝑆1)
1 − 𝑏1(𝐺|𝑆1)
where the likelihood ratio consists of the diagnosticity odds to the
power of the number of positive minus negative signals. The prior odds
drop out because we assumed 𝑃 (𝐺) = 𝑃 (𝐵) = 0.5. A popular transforma-
tion of this expression in the literature is the so-called (Grether, 1980)
decomposition. Taking logs and re-arranging, we get a linear expression
for the DM’s first-period normalized log posterior odds (lpo):

(1)

≠ 𝑐𝑘+1. If, on the other hand, the context
of the second-period news, 𝑐𝑥
of the first-period signal equals the context of the second-period signal,
the probability of recall receives an ‘‘associations boost’’ parameterized
by 𝑎 ∈ (0, 1].5

Following Mullainathan (2002) and Bordalo et al. (2023), we as-
sume that the DM applies Bayes’ rule to the signals she retrieves
from memory. Thus, we derive the DM’s posterior odds following
equation (1), except that we replace the actual signals, ∑ 𝑠𝑥, with the
recalled ones, ∑ ̂𝑠𝑥.

Using the Grether decomposition again and doing a bit of algebra

delivers:

𝑙𝑝𝑜𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑐
2

= 𝑠𝑘+1 +

= 𝑠𝑘+1 +

𝑘
∑

𝑥=1
𝑘
∑

𝑥=1

̂𝑠𝑥

𝐸[ ̂𝑠𝑥|𝑠𝑥, 𝑠𝑘+1] +

𝑘
∑

( ̂𝑠𝑥 − 𝐸[ ̂𝑠𝑥|𝑠𝑥, 𝑠𝑘+1])
𝑥=1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
∶=𝜖

= [1 + (1 − 𝑟)𝑎𝑧T
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
Overreaction

]𝑠𝑘+1 + 𝑟 (𝑁𝑝 − 𝑁𝑛)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
1st-period lpo

+𝜖

(5)

where the mean-zero noise term 𝜖 reflects that the memory technology
in (4) is random. In this Grether decomposition, the second-period
log posterior odds are expressed as a function of the second-period
signal and the first-period log posterior odds. Here, beliefs look like they
overreact to the second-period signal because the overall coefficient is
potentially strictly larger than one. Intuitively, the second-period signal
has both a direct effect on beliefs and an indirect effect through the
asymmetric recall that it generates. Indeed, when the stable contexts
are removed (T = 0), Eq. (5) does not predict overreaction. Also
observe that (5) clarifies that associative recall only distorts beliefs if
𝑧 > 0. This is intuitive: if no first-period signal equals the second-period
signal, then nothing gets cued and no asymmetric retrieval takes place.
Our experiments focus on testing the distinctive (comparative stat-
ics) predictions that arise from Eq. (5) relative to Eq. (3). In partic-
ular, our experiments will exogenously manipulate the experimental
analogues of the parameters T and 𝑧.

𝑙𝑝𝑜1 ∶=

𝑙𝑛

)

( 𝑏1(𝐺|𝑆1)
1−𝑏1(𝐺|𝑆1)
𝑙𝑛( 𝑞
1−𝑞

)

=

𝑘
∑

𝑥=1

𝑠𝑥 = 𝑁𝑝 − 𝑁𝑛

(2)

Model predictions 1.

The normalized log posterior odds vary one-for-one with changes in
the net number of positive signals. This property of Bayesian beliefs is
well-understood.

Second-period beliefs: perfect memory benchmark. By a simple extension
of the above, the normalized second-period Bayesian log posterior odds
can be expressed as

𝑙𝑝𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑠
2

∶=

𝑙𝑛

)

( 𝑏2(𝐺|𝑆2)
1−𝑏2(𝐺|𝑆2)
𝑙𝑛( 𝑞
1−𝑞

)

= 𝑠𝑘+1 + (𝑁𝑝 − 𝑁𝑛)

(3)

This expression is analytically very convenient because (i) it can be
estimated using simple OLS regressions and (ii) the perfect-memory
benchmark coefficient of the second-period signal is simple and given
by one.

Second-period beliefs: the case of associative recall. Now consider a DM
who potentially forgets some or all signals going from 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑡 = 2.
Whether or not the DM remembers a signal is determined by two
factors. First, irrespective of the piece of news, there is some probability
𝑟 ∈ [0, 1) that the DM will remember. Second, reflecting the logic of
associative recall, the probability of recalling a past signal is higher if
its context is identical to today’s context. We assume that recall ̂𝑠𝑥 of
𝑠𝑥 is given by

̂𝑠𝑥 =

{ 𝑠𝑥 with probability

∅

else

𝑟 + (1 − 𝑟)𝑎1𝑐𝑥=𝑐𝑘+1

(4)

Thus, the probability of remembering a first-period signal 𝑠𝑥 is 𝑟 when-
ever the context of the first-period signal does not match the context

1. If a strictly positive number of first-period signals are congru-
ent with the second-period signal (𝑧 > 0), overreaction of
second-period beliefs to the second-period signal is larger in the
presence of associations:

𝜕𝑙𝑝𝑜2

𝜕𝑠𝑘+1 |T=1,𝑧>0 > 𝜕𝑙𝑝𝑜2

𝜕𝑠𝑘+1 |T=0,𝑧>0.

2. If no first-period signals are congruent with the second-period
signal (𝑧 = 0), there is no differential overreaction across
treatments:

𝜕𝑙𝑝𝑜2

𝜕𝑠𝑘+1 |T=1,𝑧=0 = 𝜕𝑙𝑝𝑜2

𝜕𝑠𝑘+1 |T=0,𝑧=0.

3. In the presence of associations, overreaction increases in the
number of congruent first-period signals, 𝑧, even holding fixed
first-period beliefs:

> 0.

𝜕2𝑙𝑝𝑜2
𝜕𝑠𝑘+1𝜕𝑧 |T=1,𝑙𝑝𝑜1

In a nutshell, these predictions can be summarized with two themes.
First, if at least one first-period signal ‘‘gets cued’’ by the second-
period context, associative recall produces systematic overreaction of
beliefs to the second-period signal, which makes beliefs too extreme, on
average. Second, associative recall implies a distinctive form of history-
dependence: even holding fixed first-period beliefs, the signal history
matters for second-period beliefs.

Models of recency bias (Fudenberg et al., 2014) or optimized re-
sponses to imperfect memory (Wilson, 2014) do not generate this joint
set of predictions. For example, recency bias predicts overreaction,
but not that overreaction depends on the history of news, or that it
disappears once associative recall is shut down.

5 In a more general model, associativeness is formalized via a continuous
similarity function (Bordalo et al., 2020b). Our formulation corresponds to a
simplification in which similarity is either 0 or 1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038534B. Enke et al.

Fig. 1. Experimental Timeline. Notes. The order in which companies appear is randomly drawn, separately for each period.

3. Experimental design

Our experiment builds a bridge between the tightly-controlled and
quantitative designs that dominate modern experimental economics
and finance research on the one hand and psychological paradigms on
cued recall problems on the other hand. We particularly focused on
the following design objectives: (i) a decision setup that is closely tied
to the model in Section 2; (ii) tight control over signal structure and
associations; (iii) a financial decision environment that is intuitive for
participants; (iv) exogenous variation in the key model parameters; and
(v) incentive-compatible belief elicitation.

3.1. Experimental setup

Task overview. We implement a stylized financial decision-making task
in which subjects need to estimate the probability that each of 14
hypothetical companies is of a good rather than a bad type. Our design
follows binary-state balls-and-urns experiments, except that we add a
memory component. Each company is denoted by a capital letter. The
experiment consists of two periods (Fig. 1 provides a timeline of the
experiment). In both periods, subjects receive noisy information about
each of the companies, where first-period signals are also relevant
for second-period beliefs. The information is embedded in memorable
contexts that potentially facilitate associative recall. These contexts are
intrinsically distinct from the signals itself, which allows us to identify
the causal effect of associations above and beyond the normatively
relevant informational content of the signals. This latter aspect is a clear
advantage of a lab experiment relative to field contexts, where contexts
and signals are often inseparably intertwined.

Signal structure. The objective type of each company, 𝐺(ood) or 𝐵(ad),
is independently drawn according to 𝑃 (𝐺) = 𝑃 (𝐵) = 0.5. Subjects
receive potentially multiple binary signals that can be positive, 𝑝, or
negative, 𝑛. The signal diagnosticity is given by 𝑃 (𝑝|𝐺) = 𝑃 (𝑛|𝐵) =
0.65. In the experiment, good companies are represented by a box that
comprises 65 positive and 35 negative news, while bad companies are
represented by a box that comprises 35 positive and 65 negative news
(see Online Appendix D for a picture). The computer draws at random
from these boxes.

First period.
In the first period, subjects complete the updating task for
each of the 14 companies sequentially and in random order. For a given
company 𝑓 , subjects first observe 𝑘𝑓 i.i.d signals on separate screens,
with 𝑘𝑓 ∈ {0, … , 4}.6 On a final screen directly thereafter, subjects state
their first-period posterior belief about whether the company is good
(0%–100%). The same procedure is repeated for all companies.

After the first period, we implement a time gap in which subjects
work on an unrelated real effort task, which requires subjects to type
multiple combinations of letters and numbers into the keyboard. Sub-
jects have 8 min to type in as many combinations as they can. For each
correctly solved task, they receive 5 cents.

6 For each subject. 𝑘 = 0, 1, 3 for two companies each and 𝑘 = 2, 4 for four

companies each.

Second period.
In the second period, subjects are again tasked with
stating probabilistic beliefs about whether each of the 14 companies
is of a good or a bad type. The true state for each company is the same
as in the first period, such that all first-period signals are still relevant
in the second period.

For each company, subjects receive one additional signal and im-
mediately after state their second-period posterior belief. This proce-
dure is repeated for each company, in random order. The experimen-
tal instructions and comprehension checks emphasize that first- and
second-period signals are equally relevant for second-period beliefs.

To summarize, as depicted in Fig. 1, the timeline of the experiment
is as follows. Initially, subjects receive instructions and complete com-
prehension checks. This material covers both periods. In the first period
of the updating task, a subject first receives all first-period signals for
a company and immediately after states a first-period belief. Then, the
subject receives all first-period signals for the next company and states
a first-period belief. This process is repeated for all 14 companies, after
which an 8-minutes real effort task follows. Then, the subject receives
a second-period signal for a company and immediately after states a
second-period belief. This procedure is then again repeated for all 14
companies.

Communication of news and contexts. Signals are communicated on
subjects’ computer screens, one per screen. The signal itself is communi-
cated as ‘‘The news for company [X] is positive [negative]’’. In addition,
this signal is embedded in an intrinsically uninformative context. In
our experiment, we implement these contexts as events that explain the
occurrence of positive or negative news. We chose this implementation
of contexts because it is arguably intuitive for participants: all that
happens is that they do not just receive an abstract piece of information
about whether the company is good or bad, but that the computer also
explains to them why the news are positive or negative. Our treatment
variation (to be explained below) manipulates how events are linked
to signals, as captured by the parameter T in the model.

All events are represented by a story and an image. For example,
a positive signal may be shown along with a story about a successful
hire and a picture of the new employee. Another example is a positive
signal that is communicated to subjects with a short story about a
successful advertising campaign with a celebrity, along with a picture
of the celebrity. All stories were constructed to be of similar length and
structure. See Online Appendix Figures 7 and 8 for examples.

The written instructions clarify to subjects that the images and
stories have no purpose other than to provide a rationale for the
positive or negative news. Conditional on the signal (‘‘positive news’’
or ‘‘negative news’’), they are uninformative about the true state of
a company. The signal, image and story are displayed on subjects’
computer screens for 15 s. The time was calibrated such that subjects
had sufficient time to process the news, as well as to fully grasp the
content of the image and the story.

3.2. Sources of exogenous variation

Cue and NoCue companies. To exogenously manipulate the presence of
associations (T in the model), our design employs a within-subjects
treatment variation. For each subject, seven companies are assigned
to be in the Cue condition, while the remaining seven companies
are assigned to the NoCue condition. To counterbalance potential dif-
ferences in news events across companies, the treatment assignment

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038535B. Enke et al.

of companies was randomized across subjects, such that any given
company was a Cue company for some and a NoCue company for other
subjects.

The only difference between Cue and NoCue companies is the map-
ping between events (contexts) and signals. In Cue, every positive signal
for a given company is communicated with the same story and image,
and every negative signal for a given company is communicated with
the same (but different) story and image. For example, if a subject
received three positive and one negative signals for a company, then
all three positive signals would be communicated with the same story
and image, and the negative signal with a different story and image.
Thus, for these companies, the second-period signal potentially triggers
associative recall of congruent first-period signals through the identical
contexts.

For NoCue companies, on the other hand, each piece of news is
communicated with a unique context. Any given image and story never
appear twice, even if the company and type of news are identical.
Continuing the above example, if a subject received three positive
and one negative signals for a company, then each signal would be
communicated with a different story and image.

Subjects did not know ex ante which company was in the Cue or
NoCue condition. In fact, subjects did not even know they were being
subjected to a within-subjects treatment variation. Instead, we simply
instructed them that the events that generate positive and negative
news can potentially occur multiple times. For instance, the negative
event that a factory burns down can occur multiple times and cause
multiple negative news that should all (independently) be taken into
account. The instructions emphasized that while the same event can
occur multiple times, it can only occur for the same company. Likewise,
we emphasized that the same event can only be associated with positive
or negative news but never with both. Thus, subjects knew that if
the second-period signal for company A is negative because a factory
burned down, and the subject remembers having read this story before,
then they know that they must have received at least one negative
signal about company A in the first period.

We further instructed subjects to treat each piece of news as in-
dependent and in an identical fashion, regardless of which events
are associated with these news. For instance, we emphasized that
the following two signal histories are equally informative: (i) three
positive news about a company, all of which are triggered by the same
event and (ii) three positive news about a company, each of which is
triggered by a different event. We verified subjects’ understanding of
the intrinsic irrelevance of whether the same event occurs repeatedly
through comprehension questions (see Online Appendix D.3.2).

In summary, a within-subjects treatment design is particularly nat-
ural in our context because the entire treatment variation boils down
to whether, for a given company, a subject receives multiple signals
that are triggered by the same event or by multiple different events.
The order of companies was randomized at the subject level, such that
subjects (unknowingly) repeatedly alternated between Cue and NoCue
companies. Thus, potential order or contrast effects – sometimes a
concern in within-subjects designs – are implausible in our context.

Signal histories. On top of the within-subjects-across-company variation
in the presence of associations, we also causally identify the role of
associative recall by exogenously varying the number (and realiza-
tions) of first-period signals at the subject-company level. We leverage
this source of exogenous variation to test the predictions derived in
Section 2 about how the presence or magnitude of overreaction de-
pends on the number of congruent first-period signals. This layer of
randomization is directly built into the design because (i) the number
of first-period signals for each company randomly varies between one
and four, and (ii) conditional on the number of signals, both first- and
second-period signals are randomly generated.

Interpretation of treatment comparison. Our Cue condition is admittedly
extreme in the sense that signals and contexts are perfectly correlated.
We chose this implementation to keep the experimental design as
simple and transparent as possible. While in reality people likely do
not repeatedly experience the same signals in exactly the same context,
the Cue condition is arguably more reflective of reality than the NoCue
condition. This is because in many contexts similar signals will be
associated with similar contexts. For example, whenever good news
prevail in the stock market, people are disproportionately exposed to
bulls, upward-sloping trend lines, and good-times stories (see, e.g.,
Shiller, 2019).

3.3. Incentives

Subjects stated their beliefs about whether a company is good
vs. bad using a slider (0%–100%). Beliefs were incentivized using a
binarized scoring rule (Hossain and Okui, 2013). Under this scoring
rule, subjects could potentially earn a prize of 10 euros. While these
stakes are substantially smaller than those present in real financial
markets, recent experimental work using very large incentives finds
that the presence of belief updating errors is often robust to the stake
size employed (Enke et al., 2021a).

The probability of receiving the prize is given by 𝑝 = 1 − (𝑏 − 𝑡)2,
where 𝑏 is the belief that a company is good and 𝑡 the truth.7 In order
to avoid hedging motives, at the end of the experiment one of the 28
beliefs was randomly selected for payment. Since second-period beliefs
are our main outcome measure, we incentivized them more heavily, in
expectation: with 90% probability a second-period belief was randomly
selected for payment, and with 10% probability a first-period belief.

3.4. Serial independence of signals

A key element of the theoretical framework in Section 2 and our ex-
perimental design is that signals are conditionally independent. Under
serial dependence (positive autocorrelation), it would be ‘‘rational’’ for
subjects who forgot the first-period signals to ‘‘overreact’’ to the second-
period signal even without any associative recall, simply because they
would rationally infer from a positive second-period signal that the
first-period signals were likely positive. This would be a potential
concern for our design (only) if subjects assumed a higher level of
autocorrelation for the Cue than the NoCue companies.

To address such concerns, we took two steps. First, the instruc-
tions used intuitive language to emphasize that the signals are serially
(conditionally) independent. We augmented these explanations with a
comprehension check question that specifically asked subjects whether
a positive signal becomes more likely after a positive signal was drawn.
Second, an account of overreaction that is based on assumed auto-
correlation does not generate the additional prediction that overreac-
tion depends in nuanced ways on the signal history. This is because
assumed autocorrelation predicts that subjects always infer from a
positive second-period signal that the first-period signals were likely
also positive, irrespective of the actual realizations of the first-period
signals. In contrast, our model predicts that overreaction depends on
the company-specific random realizations of the first-period signals.
It seems implausible that subjects mentally impute (and remember)
different degrees of autocorrelation for each company based on the
first-period signals, especially given how salient our instructions are
about the absence of autocorrelation.

7 Danz et al. (2022) provide evidence that the binarized scoring rule can
lead to a tendency to state less extreme beliefs. Even if such bias was present in
our experiment, it would not confound our causal identification, which holds
the belief elicitation constant between treatments. If anything, it would lead
to an under-estimation of the effect of associative recall on overreaction.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038536B. Enke et al.

3.5. Relationship to psychology paradigms

Our experimental design builds on the main ideas of a well-known
paradigm in memory research, namely lists of word-pairs (Kahana,
2012). Subjects first sequentially observe word pairs, consisting of
a ‘‘target’’ and a ‘‘cue’’. At a later stage, subjects’ recall of target
words is greater when they are provided with the cue word during
recall elicitation (Tulving and Thomson, 1973). The analogy to our
experimental design is that the signal is the target and the context
serves as cue.

The technique we use to generate partial ‘‘forgetting’’ of first-period
signals is a variant of the word-pairs paradigm that is called AB/AC in
the psychology literature (see chapters 4–5 in Kahana, 2012). Subjects
first memorize word pairs (‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B’’). Then, in a second step, they
memorize new word pairs, some of which involve one of the words
from the first set (‘‘A’’ and ‘‘C’’). The main finding is that recall of the
A-B pair is significantly impaired after subjects learn the A-C pair. This
is commonly referred to as ‘‘interference’’. Building on this paradigm,
our experimental design creates partial forgetting of first-period signals
through: (i) a time lag (distraction task) and (ii) interference that results
from the presence of 14 companies with identical news (‘‘positive’’ and
‘‘negative’’). See Online Appendix A for a more detailed discussion of
the psychology literature on associative recall.

3.6. Econometric specifications and predictions

𝑘+1

𝑘+1 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑖,𝑓

𝑇 𝑖,𝑓 + 𝛽3𝑇 𝑖,𝑓 + 𝛽4(𝑁 𝑖,𝑓

Following the theoretical framework in Section 2, for most analyses
we transform subjects’ raw beliefs into normalized log posterior odds.
Eq. (5) directly suggests the following estimating equation for a po-
tential treatment difference in subject 𝑖’s normalized second-period log
posterior odds about whether company 𝑓 is good:
𝑙𝑝𝑜𝑖,𝑓 = 𝛽1𝑠𝑖,𝑓
where 𝑇 𝑖,𝑓 is a binary treatment indicator that equals one if, for a given
subject, company 𝑓 was in the Cue condition. In words, we regress a
subject’s normalized log posterior odds on the second-period signal, a
treatment indicator, their interaction and the net number of positive
first-period signals. We predict that the interaction effect is positive,
𝛽2 > 0, and that this positive interaction effect is only driven by cases
when congruent first-period signals were observed, that is, with 𝑧 > 0.
Furthermore, within the set of Cue companies, we test how overre-

𝑝 − 𝑁 𝑖,𝑓

𝑛 ) + 𝜖𝑖,𝑓

(6)

action depends on the number of cued first-period signals:
𝑙𝑝𝑜𝑖,𝑓 = 𝛽5𝑠𝑖,𝑓

𝑧𝑖,𝑓 + 𝛽7𝑧𝑖,𝑓 + 𝛽8(𝑁 𝑖,𝑓

𝑝 − 𝑁 𝑖,𝑓

𝑛 ) + 𝜖𝑖,𝑓

𝑘+1 + 𝛽6𝑠𝑖,𝑓

𝑘+1

(7)

Here, we predict a form of history-dependence, which is that the
interaction between the second-period signal and the number of cued
first-period signals is positive: 𝛽6 > 0.

3.7. Procedures and logistics

In total, we implemented three experiments, all of which were con-
ducted at the same time and randomized within experimental sessions.
The first experiment is the one described above, which we refer to as
Beliefs experiment. In addition, we also implemented a Recall experi-
ment (to directly elicit which first-period signals subjects remember in
the second period) and a Market experiment (to study market behavior
based on associative recall). We discuss these additional experiments
in Sections 5 and 4.4, respectively.

All three experiments were conducted as Zoom online experiments
based on the subject pool of the BonnEconLab of the University of Bonn.
The experiments were computerized using Qualtrics and lasted up to
90 min. Subjects met with an experimenter via Zoom and received a
participation link to the experimental software via Zoom chat. Subjects
were told not to use any material (such as pen and paper) during the
experiment. Online Appendix D contains the full set of instructions,
translated into English. Subjects were given unlimited time to read the

instructions and could ask questions at any point in time using the
Zoom chat.

After subjects finished the instructions, they completed computer-
ized comprehension check questions, see Online Appendix D. Whenever
a subject did not solve a control question correctly, a computer screen
pointed out the mistake and explained the correct solution. As we
pre-registered, we exclude subjects that answered more than one com-
prehension check question incorrectly (5% of potential participants).
As we pre-specified, 100 valid completes were collected for the Beliefs
experiment. Average earnings were 16.50 euros, which includes a
participation payment of 10 euros.

All experiments in this paper were pre-registered in the AEA RCT
registry, see https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/9215. The
pre-registration includes the design of all experiments reported in this
paper, predictions, sample sizes, and that subjects would be dropped
from the sample (and replaced) if they answer more than one compre-
hension check question incorrectly.

4. Results

4.1. Preliminaries: First-period beliefs

Model equation (2) posits that the normalized log posterior odds
in the first period move one-for-one with variation in the first-period
signals. Online Appendix Table C1 shows that, in our data, this is in-
deed the case, for both Cue and NoCue companies. While our treatment
comparisons of second-period beliefs do not hinge on first-period beliefs
being close to Bayesian, this piece of information is helpful because it
shows that it is largely irrelevant whether our second-period regressions
control for first-period log posterior odds or the number of positive
minus negative first-period signals (see Eq. (5)).

Our treatment comparison of second-period beliefs is, however, only
valid if first-period beliefs do not differ from each other across treat-
ments in a way that would spuriously generate a treatment difference
also in second-period beliefs. While the experimental design offers no
ex-ante reason for why first-period beliefs should differ across Cue
and NoCue companies, Online Appendix Table C2 formally tests this.
Reassuringly, we find that the difference in first-period beliefs across
treatments is very small and statistically insignificant.

4.2. Second-period beliefs: A look at the raw data

As derived in Section 2, an immediate implication of associative
recall is that second-period beliefs are on average more extreme (fur-
ther away from 50%) in the presence of associations. Fig. 2 provides
a first test of this, by showing kernel density plots of the distribution
of second-period beliefs, separately for Cue and NoCue companies.
The left panel shows beliefs following a negative second-period signal,
while the right panel shows beliefs following a positive second-period
signal. Recall that for each subject-company combination the signal
realizations in the first and second period were randomly generated.
The belief heterogeneity in Fig. 2 therefore captures a combination
of (i) variation in first-period signal realizations and (ii) variation in
beliefs across subjects conditional on the same signal realizations.

We see that beliefs in Cue are substantially more extreme, following
both a positive and a negative second-period signal. While we conduct
more sophisticated regression analyses below, we note that this treat-
ment difference in average beliefs is statistically highly significant in
both panels, see Online Appendix Table C2.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038537B. Enke et al.

Fig. 2. Kernel density estimates of second-period beliefs as a function of treatment and second-period signal. The horizontal green line indicates the average Bayesian posterior
across all belief formation problems. Kernel is Epanechnikov. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)

4.3. Econometric analysis

A main advantage of visualizing the data as in Fig. 2 is that the
analysis is very transparent as it does not require any transformations
of the raw data. A disadvantage of working with the raw beliefs data,
however, is that it does not allow for quantitative analyses of overre-
action in which empirical results can be compared against normative
benchmarks. The reason is that over- vs. underreaction is typically
defined through the Grether (1980) regressions that our theoretical
framework also directly motivates.8

As shown in Eq. (6), these Grether regressions relate the (nor-
malized) log posterior odds to the second-period signal, controlling
for the number of positive minus negative signals in the first period.
Fig. 3 visualizes the results of these OLS regressions by displaying the
coefficient of the second-period signal. Recall that the second-period
posterior log odds are transformed such that the Bayesian benchmark
coefficient is one. We conduct this analysis separately by condition and
by looking at random variation in the number of first-period signals that
are congruent with the second-period signal. The figure shows point
estimates along with 95% confidence intervals.

As predicted by the theoretical framework, we observe three pat-
terns. First, when no first-period signal is congruent with the second-
period signal (𝑧 = 0), subjects state identical beliefs across treatments.9
Second, for any strictly positive number of congruent first-period sig-
nals (𝑧 > 0), the effect of the second-period signal is significantly
larger in Cue than in NoCue. This documents that associations generate
overreaction.

Third, looking within treatment Cue, the effect of the second-period
signal monotonically increases in the number of congruent signals. Note
that – consistent with the results from the NoCue condition – in the
absence of associative recall the regression coefficient should not at all

8 As is well-known in the literature, a slight challenge in directly estimating
Grether regressions on real data is that people occasionally state beliefs of 0%
or 100%, which makes them undefined under the log odds transformation. In
our data, this is the case for 93 second-period beliefs (6.6% of all data). To
avoid a loss of observations, we recode observations of 0% as 1% and 100%
as 99%. Online Appendix Table C3 shows that our results are quantitatively
virtually identical if we do not replace these observations but instead lose them
through the log odds transformation.

9 Note that the coefficients in these cases do not differ much from one which
suggests that subjects weight the signals on average similar to the Bayesian
benchmark. This finding is consistent with Augenblick et al. (2023), who also
find updating similar to the Bayesian benchmark for a signal precision of 0.65,
which is the signal precision we implemented in our experiment.

Fig. 3. Effect of second-period signal on (normalized) second-period log posterior
odds, as a function of the number of congruent first-period signals in Cue and NoCue.
The point estimates are derived from the OLS regression equation (6), which is run
separately for each value of 𝑧. The figure plots ̂𝛽1 for NoCue and ̂𝛽1 + ̂𝛽3 for Cue. The
figure does not include 𝑧 = 4 because there are very few observations with such a
signal history. All regression analyses that are reported in tables include these cases.
Whiskers show 95% confidence intervals, computed based on clustering at the subject
level.

depend on the first-period signal history. Thus, this third result provides
evidence for a form of history dependence that is absent in standard
economic models of belief formation without associative recall.

Table 1 provides the regression results. The table notes contain
detailed explanations about the construction of each variable, where
the construction always follows the logic from the model in Section 2.
The regressions again directly correspond to the estimating Eqs. (6)
and (7) that our model motivates. We construct the table such that the
most relevant independent variables are listed at the top. First, columns
(1)–(3) focus on across-treatment differences. Column (1) shows that, in
the full sample of 1400 second-period beliefs (100 subjects, 14 compa-
nies each), the effect of the second-period signal is indeed significantly
larger in Cue than in NoCue. Columns (2) and (3) decompose this
treatment difference into cases with 𝑧 = 0 and 𝑧 > 0, where the model
only predicts a treatment difference in the latter case. Consistent with
the visual impression from Fig. 3, this is indeed what the regressions
show. In terms of quantitative magnitude, column (3) shows that in the
theoretically-relevant case with 𝑧 > 0, the effect of the second-period
signal is more than 80% larger for the Cue companies.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038538B. Enke et al.

Table 1
Overreaction in Cue and NoCue.

Sample:

t = 2 signal

t = 2 signal ×1 if Cue

t = 2 signal ×# of congruent t=1 signals

Sum of congruent t = 1 signals × 1 if Cue

Sum of incongruent t = 1 signals × 1 if Cue

1 if Cue

Sum of t = 1 signals (pos. minus neg.)

# of congruent t = 1 signals

t = 1 normalized log posterior odds

Sum of congruent t = 1 signals

Sum of incongruent t = 1 signals

Dependent variable:
2nd period normalized log posterior odds

Cue vs. NoCue

Full

(1)

1.20***
(0.14)

0.61***
(0.15)

𝑧 = 0

(2)

1.20***
(0.15)

−0.017
(0.17)

𝑧 > 0

(3)

1.13***
(0.15)

0.88***
(0.19)

−0.097
(0.12)

0.42***
(0.05)

0.0093
(0.14)

0.26***
(0.09)

−0.16
(0.12)

0.41***
(0.06)

Cue

Full

(4)

1.42***
(0.18)

Full

(5)

1.40***
(0.14)

Cue vs. NoCue

Full

(6)

1.29***
(0.16)

k > z > 0

(7)

1.38***
(0.27)

0.32**
(0.13)

0.35***
(0.10)

0.40***
(0.08)

−0.074
(0.06)

−0.068
(0.05)

0.38***
(0.07)

0.50***
(0.11)

0.086
(0.08)

−0.10
(0.11)

0.26***
(0.07)

0.28***
(0.09)

1400
0.42

0.64***
(0.15)

0.19
(0.12)

−0.14
(0.14)

0.27**
(0.13)

0.35***
(0.11)

630
0.46

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

1400
0.41

418
0.20

982
0.47

700
0.49

700
0.54

Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level. Following the estimating equations (6) and (7) that we derived from the model,
the estimations do not include a constant. However, we have verified that including a constant delivers almost identical results. Both the first- and the second-period log posterior
odds are normalized by the log diagnosticity odds as described by Eq. (2). In column (7), the sample is restricted to signal histories where 𝑘 > 𝑧 > 0, i.e., (i) with at least one
congruent first-period signal and (ii) at least one incongruent first-period signal. Variable labels: ‘‘t = 2 signal’’ equals 1 if signal positive and (−1) if negative. ‘‘# of (in)congruent
t = 1 signals’’ captures the number of 1st period signals that do (do not) equal the second-period signal. ‘‘Sum of (in)congruent t = 1 signals’’ captures the number of positive
minus negative 1st period signals that are (in)congruent with the 2nd period signal. * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.

Columns (4) and (5) report regression results that only leverage
variation in the number of congruent signals within the Cue condi-
tion. Here, the coefficient of interest is the interaction between the
second-period signal and the number of congruent first-period signals.
Consistent with what we saw in Fig. 3, both regression specifica-
tions show that the effect of the second-period signal is significantly
stronger when there are more congruent signals. This result on history-
dependence of beliefs holds both when we control for the first-period
signals (column (4)) and when we directly control for the subject’s
normalized first-period log posterior odds (column (5)).10

Result 1. Overreaction in beliefs is significantly larger in Cue than in
NoCue. This treatment difference only exists when the number of congruent
first-period signals is strictly positive.

Result 2. Within condition Cue, overreaction increases significantly in the
number of congruent first-period signals.

10 Our model posits that what drives the magnitude of overreaction is the
number of congruent first-period signals, irrespective of the specific order in
which signals were received. For example, from the perspective of the model,
signal histories of pos-pos-neg and neg-pos-pos are identical. Online Appendix
Table C4 provides a tentative analysis of this issue. While these analyses
generally suffer from very low power (because there is a large number of
distinct possible signal histories), the results are indicative that the order of
signals indeed does not affect the magnitude of overreaction.

4.4. Mechanism: Asymmetric recall of Cued signals

The model in Section 2 posits that the overreaction of beliefs reflects
that subjects in Cue asymmetrically remember those first-period signals
that are congruent with the second-period signal. In this subsection,
we provide two pieces of causal evidence that the treatment difference
between Cue and NoCue indeed reflects the asymmetric retrieval of
specific signals that do/do not get cued by the second-period contexts.

Differential responsiveness of beliefs to congruent and incongruent signals.
Re-consider the model in Section 2. Because our model of asymmetric
recall focuses on whether or not a first-period signal is congruent with
the second-period signal, it is useful to define by 𝑁 𝑧 ∶= 𝑧𝑠𝑘+1 the sum
of congruent first-period signals and by 𝑁 𝑢 ∶= −(𝑘 − 𝑧)𝑠𝑘+1 the sum
of incongruent first-period signals. Note that one of these quantities is
positive, while the other is negative. To take a simple example, suppose
that for a given company a subject observed three positive and one
negative first-period signals and then a negative second-period signal.
In this case, the sum of congruent first-period signals is (−1) and the
incongruent sum is three.

Using this notation, the main model equation (5) can equivalently

be expressed as

𝑙𝑝𝑜𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑐
2

= 𝑠𝑘+1 +

𝑘
∑

𝑥=1

̂𝑠𝑥 = 𝑠𝑘+1 + [𝑟 + (1 − 𝑟)𝑎T]𝑁 𝑧 + 𝑟𝑁 𝑢 + 𝜖

(8)

This alternative expression for the Grether decomposition is helpful
because – unlike the regressions reported above – it includes the sum of
congruent and the sum of incongruent first-period signals as separate
regressors. Crucially, the straightforward implication of associative

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038539B. Enke et al.

recall in our model is that the associations boost is asymmetric and only
applies to the congruent-first period signals rather than all first-period
signals. This implication of our model is distinctively different from a
potential alternative model, according to which a second-period context
(if it was also experienced in the first period) cues an improved recall
of all first-period signals for a company, regardless of whether they are
congruent or incongruent.

To test this, column (6) of Table 1 reports the results of a regression
that interacts the sums of congruent and incongruent first-period sig-
nals separately with a treatment indicator. We find that the interaction
effect of our treatment dummy (= 1 if Cue) with the sum of congruent
first-period signals is quantitatively very large (twice as large as the raw
coefficient of the congruent signals) and statistically highly significant.
Meanwhile, the interaction effect with the sum of incongruent first-
period signals is statistically insignificant and the point estimate close
to zero. This shows that subjects’ beliefs about Cue companies overreact
to congruent first-period signals, as predicted by Eq. (8). Column (7)
of Table 1 shows this result also holds when we restrict attention to
cases where at least one first-period signal was congruent and at least
one incongruent with the second-period signal (𝑘 > 𝑧 > 0). This is a
useful robustness check because in these cases the second-period signal
definitely acts as a cue for either positive or negative signals (in column
(6) we also include cases where potentially no first-period signal gets
cued, such that treatment Cue cannot have an effect).

In summary, the results from columns (6) and (7) clarify that
the entire treatment difference between Cue and NoCue is driven by
an asymmetric responsiveness to congruent first-period signals, rather
than an improved overall responsiveness to first-period signals in Cue.

Differential recall of congruent and incongruent signals. A second test of
our mechanism is to directly gather data on which first-period signals
subjects remember. According to the model, subjects should remember
more congruent (but not incongruent) signals in Cue than in NoCue.

To test this, we implemented experiment Recall, which again ran-
domized companies to treatments Recall Cue and Recall NoCue within
subject. This experiment was randomized within experimental sessions
with the Beliefs experiments described above. The experiment was
identical to the Beliefs experiment, except that after receiving a second-
period signal, subjects were asked to directly report the number of
positive and negative signals they recall for a company. Subjects an-
swered 28 such questions (recall of positive and negative signals for
14 companies each). For a randomly selected recall question, subjects
received 10 euros if their answer was within +/−1 of the truth. Except
for the recall component, the experiments and the underlying instruc-
tions were identical to those in Beliefs. To maximize similarity with
the Beliefs experiment, the initial instructions only explained the belief
elicitation task, and that first-period signals would also be relevant
for second-period beliefs. Then, after subjects had concluded the first
period as well as the distraction task, the recall task was announced as
a surprise. As in the Beliefs experiment, subjects received one additional
signal for each company and immediately after indicated their recall of
positive and negative signals. Online Appendix D provides the exper-
imental instructions. As we pre-registered, 70 subjects participated in
this experiment. Average earnings were 18.50 euros, which includes a
participation payment of 10 euros.

Fig. 4 summarizes the results by reporting subjects’ effective recall
of first-period signals as a function of the truth, separately for congruent
first-period signals (left panel) and incongruent first-period signals
(right panel).11 The left panel shows a large and statistically highly

11 In our experiments, we elicited subjects’ total recall of signals in the entire
experiment, including of those in the second period. For example, in cases in
which we elicit recall of positive signals and the subject observed a positive
second-period signal, effective recall of first-period signals is given by the
reported recall minus one. This corresponds to the arguably very plausible
assumption that subjects do not forget the second-period signal that they saw
a few seconds ago on the previous screen.

significant treatment difference in the recall of congruent signals: sub-
jects remember substantially more congruent first-period signals for Cue
companies than for NoCue ones. In contrast, the right panel shows that
for incongruent first-period signals (those that differ in signal type from
the second-period one), this treatment difference is much smaller and
not statistically significant. Indeed, Online Appendix Table C5 shows
that the relevant difference-in-difference effect (treatment condition
times congruent/incongruent signals) is statistically highly significant.
These results again show that the associations that are present in Cue
primarily induce asymmetric recall of congruent first-period signals
rather than improved recall in general.12

Result 3. Overreaction in second-period beliefs is driven by asymmetric
recall of those first-period signals that get cued by the second-period context.

Because our beliefs experiment and our recall experiment were
conducted with different sets of participants, we cannot investigate
whether, across individuals, the magnitude of associate recall and the
magnitude of overreaction line up. However, using our model – in
particular the memory technology in Eq. (4) – we can use a back-
of-the-envelope calculation to triangulate between average beliefs and
average recall. First, in the beliefs data, notice from Eqs. (5) and (6)
that the regression coefficient of the interaction between a treatment
dummy and the second-period signal (𝛽2 in eq. (6)), identifies (1 −
𝑟)𝑎𝑧𝑖,𝑓 . Thus, multiplying 𝑠𝑖,𝑓
𝑘+1 in Eq. (6) by 𝑧𝑖,𝑓 and then estimating
the regression allows us to back out the estimated ‘‘associations boost’’
(1 − ̂𝑟𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑓 𝑠) ̂𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑓 𝑠 = 0.47.

In the recall data, observe from Eq. (4) that, if the second-period
signal equals the first-period one, the ‘‘associations boost’’ can be
estimated by regressing reported effective recall (of positive or negative
first-period signals) on the corresponding true number and its interac-
tion with a treatment dummy. Here, under the model, the interaction
coefficient reveals (1 − 𝑟)𝑎, see Eq. (4). We estimate this quantity as
(1 − ̂𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙) ̂𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = 0.37, roughly in the same ballpark as the estimates
based on the beliefs data.

5. Betting market experiment

5.1. Design

The basic structure of the Market experiment is identical to the
Beliefs experiment, except that the belief elicitation task is embedded
in a parimutuel betting market. While the canonical application of
parimutuel markets is horse race betting, there are direct analogies
to financial markets, where betters bet on mutually exclusive states
of the world, such as whether an asset will increase or decrease in
value. Indeed, parimutuel betting markets are frequently implemented
in laboratory experiments because of their simplicity and appealing
resemblance of real-world markets (e.g., Plott et al., 2003; Kendall and
Oprea, 2018; Enke et al., 2023).

Parimutuel betting and payoffs.
In our implementation, subjects are
again asked to state probabilistic beliefs about whether each of 14
hypothetical companies is of a good type, after receiving a series of
binary signals. The prior probabilities and signal structure are identical
to those in the Beliefs experiment. Subjects are matched into groups of
three and know that all participants in their market group receive the
same public signals. In both part 1 and part 2 of the experiment, after
observing signals as in the Beliefs experiment, each market participant
privately states their subjective percent chance that the company is
good. Immediately after, in both parts of the experiment, the three

12 Online Appendix Figure B3 shows that we replicate this recall pattern also
when we restrict attention to cases in which at least one first-period signal is
congruent with and at least one incongruent with the second-period signal,
analogous to column (7) of Table 1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385310B. Enke et al.

Fig. 4. Effective recall of congruent (left panel) and incongruent (right panel) first-period signals in Recall Cue and Recall NoCue. Effective recall equals reported recall for signals
that differ from the second-period signal, and reported recall minus one for signals that equal it. The point estimates stem from an OLS regression of effective recall on a treatment
dummy. The figures plot the coefficient of the constant for NoCue and the sum of the coefficients of the constant and the treatment dummy for Cue. The figure does not include
the case of four first-period signals because there are very few observations with such a signal history. Whiskers show 95% confidence intervals, computed based on clustering at
the subject level.

subjects interact in a parimutuel betting market. For each of their 28
betting decisions (14 companies and two periods each), subjects receive
a budget of 10 euros. This money can be fully or partly bet on one or
both of two propositions: that the company is good and that it is bad.
The bets are implemented in two steps (on the same decision screen):

depends on the market price (9). Intuitively, the subject earns more
money the more the subject bets on the right state and the more other
subjects bet on the wrong state. The parimutuel price mechanism in
our implementation fully redistributes all money that is bet; there is no
efficiency loss or transaction cost.

1. Betting amount: Subjects state the total amount they want to bet
(maximum 10 euros, minimum 0 euros). We denote this amount
by 𝑚.

2. Betting proportion: Subjects state which fraction (denoted by 𝑤)
of 𝑚 they bet on the proposition that the company is good. Thus,
the total amount bet on the event that the company is good is
𝑤𝑚 and the total amount bet on the event that the company is
bad is (1 − 𝑤)𝑚.

With subjects 𝑖 = 1, 2, 3, the parimutuel market price in period 𝑡 in group
𝑔 for the asset that company 𝑓 is good is defined as13:

𝜔𝑔,𝑓

𝑡 =

∑3

𝑡 𝑚𝑖,𝑔,𝑓

𝑡

𝑖=1 𝑤𝑖,𝑔,𝑓
∑3

𝑖=1 𝑚𝑖,𝑔,𝑓

𝑡

∈ [0, 1]

(9)

This has a simple interpretation, according to which the price is given
by a weighted average of the betting proportions, where the weights
are given by the betting amounts. Thus, the parimutuel price for an
asset increases in the fraction of the total money in the market that is
bet on the respective state. To intuitively relate this market price back
to subjects’ beliefs, consider the hypothetical scenario that the betting
proportion for the good state is directly given by each subject’s belief
that the company is good (under expected utility, this will be the case
when utility is 𝑢(𝑥) = 𝑙𝑛(𝑥), see Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2006). Under
this scenario, the market price would be given by the weighted average
belief, where the weights are given by how much each subject bets.

The payoffs of subject 𝑖 in period 𝑡 in market group 𝑔 for company

𝑓 are given by

𝜋𝑖,𝑔,𝑓
𝑡

= (10 − 𝑚𝑖,𝑔,𝑓

𝑡

) +

𝑡 𝑚𝑖,𝑔,𝑓
𝑤𝑖,𝑔,𝑓
𝑡
𝜔𝑔,𝑓
𝑡

1𝜃=𝐺 +

(1 − 𝑤𝑖,𝑔,𝑓

)𝑚𝑖,𝑔,𝑓
𝑡

𝑡
(1 − 𝜔𝑔,𝑓

𝑡

)

1𝜃=𝐵

(10)

In words, the subject keeps the part of the endowment that is not
bet. In addition, the subject loses all money bet on the wrong state.
Money bet on the right state yields a positive return whose magnitude

Treatments and randomization. Analogously to the Beliefs experiment,
we conduct two treatment conditions (within-subject-across-companies)
that exogenously manipulate the presence of associations. For compa-
nies in Market Cue, each positive/negative signal is again associated
with the same context/event. In contrast, for companies in Market
NoCue, each signal is communicated with a different event. As in the
individual belief elicitation treatments, for each subject the computer
randomly selected seven companies to be in Cue and seven to be in
NoCue. In addition to the across-treatment variation in the relevance
of associative recall, the experiment again features random variation
in the number of cued first-period signals (𝑧).

Logistics and payoffs. As in the Beliefs experiment, there are a total
of 14 hypothetical companies. The number of signals subjects see in
part 1, the signal realizations as well as the order in which subjects
see the companies is fully randomized across market groups. To avoid
hedging, at the end of the experiment, for each subject, one of the two
parts of the experiment and one company are randomly selected to be
payout-relevant. For the randomly-selected company and part, either
the subject’s belief or the betting decision are randomly chosen and
implemented for payment.14

The Market experiment was randomized within experimental ses-
sions with the Beliefs experiment. The procedures and the subject
pool (BonnEconLab, conducted over Zoom) were identical. The sam-
ple size was 240 subjects (80 groups). Average earnings were 19.80
euros, which includes a participation payment of 10 euros. Subjects
remained in the same group throughout the experiment. No feedback
was provided at any point. The Market experiment was also part of
the pre-registration mentioned previously, including the experimental
design, predictions and sample size.

5.2. Predictions

As is well-known, depending on assumptions on utility functions,
betting market prices need not necessarily reflect average beliefs in

13 When none of the subjects in a market group bets money in a given round,
the market price is missing. This occurs in only two out of 1120 second-period
observations.

14 Individual beliefs were incentivized with the same binarized scoring rule

as in Section 3.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385311B. Enke et al.

the market.15 Our main interest here, however, is not in understanding
how exactly beliefs aggregate to market prices but, instead, in the
comparative statics effects regarding the role of associative recall:
whether second-period market prices react more strongly to second-
period signals in the presence of associations, and how this ‘‘over-
reaction’’ varies as a function of the signal history. Accordingly, we
here only heuristically discuss our pre-registered predictions for the
experiment.

To begin, consider again the definition of the parimutuel market
price in Eq. (9). Note that subjects’ betting proportion on the proposi-
tion that a company is good (𝑤) will usually increase in their belief that
the company is good. Then, if associative recall generates overreaction
in beliefs, we might also expect to see overreaction in market prices.
To take a particularly simple example, suppose again that each subject’s
betting proportion is directly given by his/her belief. Then, the market
price is given by the weighted average belief in the market, and the
degree of overreaction in market prices will be given by the average
amount of overreaction in beliefs, weighted by each subject’s betting
amount.

At the same time, there are also reasons to expect that the degree
of associations-driven overreaction in market prices may be attenuated
relative to overreaction in beliefs. The reason is that – just like almost
all real market environments – our betting market entails a strong
element of self-selection, which is given by the amount of money a
subject is willing to bet, captured by 𝑚. In particular, it is conceivable
that those people who are more susceptible to associative recall have
a loose awareness that their beliefs may be biased (but do not know
how specifically, such that they cannot correct for it). If this is the
case, then these people may be less inclined to bet aggressively on their
beliefs and therefore influence the price less. Thus, heterogeneity in
betting amounts that reflects heterogeneity in people’s confidence in
their belief updating rule ‘‘re-weights’’ individual beliefs as far as the
market price is concerned. This re-weighting of beliefs through self-
selection is similar to how wealth heterogeneity re-weights individual
beliefs in classical models of betting markets (Wolfers and Zitzewitz,
2004).

To illustrate, take the extreme example that out of the three subjects
in a market group, one has no memory limitations, while the other two
succumb to associative recall. Further suppose that the two associative
recall types have sufficient doubts about the rationality of their beliefs
that they do not bet at all in the market. Then, average beliefs in the
market will exhibit overreaction, but the market price will not, purely
as a result of differential self-selection. Of course, by an analogous logic,
the market price could also reflect more overreaction than individual
beliefs if those subjects that have a stronger tendency for associative
recall bet more money in the parimutuel market.

Enke et al. (2023) study this type of self-selection mechanism in
betting markets for various cognitive biases, but they do not consider
memory. However, this is important to do because while much psy-
chological research has documented the existence of associative recall,
much less is known about whether people are willing to actually act on
beliefs that are derived from associative recall, such that they become
relevant when multiple individuals interact in markets.

Naturally, our main object of interest in the analysis of market
prices will not be the level of over- or underreaction (as it could be
affected by various considerations of how betting markets aggregate
beliefs), but instead the causal effects of the random components of
our experimental design: (i) the presence of associations; and (ii) the
number of congruent first-period signals. For comparability, we analyze
the data from the market experiments using the same methodology as
the individual beliefs data. We first transform second-period market

15 For discussions of whether and how betting/prediction markets generally
aggregate beliefs, see Manski (2006) and Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2004, 2006).

prices into normalized log market price odds16 (𝑙𝑚𝑝𝑜) in market 𝑔
for company 𝑓 following equation (2) and then link these to the
second-period signal:
𝑙𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑔,𝑓 = ̃𝛽1𝑠𝑔,𝑓
𝑇 𝑔,𝑓 + ̃𝛽3𝑇 𝑔,𝑓 + ̃𝛽4(𝑁 𝑔,𝑓
where 𝑇 𝑔,𝑓 is a binary treatment indicator that equals one if, for a given
market group, company 𝑓 is in the Market Cue condition. Here, we
again predict and pre-registered that ̃𝛽2 > 0, and that this treatment
difference is only driven by cases with 𝑧 > 0.

𝑘+1 + ̃𝛽2𝑠𝑔,𝑓

𝑝 − 𝑁 𝑔,𝑓

) + 𝜖𝑔,𝑓

(11)

𝑘+1

𝑛

Furthermore, within the set of Cue companies, we again test for
an interaction effect of the second-period signal with the number of
congruent first-period signals:
𝑙𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑔,𝑓 = ̃𝛽5𝑠𝑔,𝑓
𝑘+1
We pre-registered the prediction that ̃𝛽6 > 0.

𝑧𝑔,𝑓 + ̃𝛽7𝑧𝑔,𝑓 + ̃𝛽8(𝑁 𝑔,𝑓

𝑘+1 + ̃𝛽6𝑠𝑔,𝑓

𝑝 − 𝑁 𝑔,𝑓
𝑛

) + 𝜖𝑔,𝑓

(12)

5.3. Results

Replication of patterns on beliefs. Because we also elicited subjects’
beliefs in the market experiments, we can use these data to replicate
all patterns from the individual belief elicitation treatments. This is
done in Online Appendix Table C6. The results are almost identical to
those reported above: (i) there is more overreaction for Cue than NoCue
companies; (ii) this treatment difference only exists when the number of
congruent first-period signals (𝑧) is strictly positive; (iii) overreaction
in Cue significantly increases in 𝑧; and (iv) this overreaction reflects
asymmetric recall of cued signals in the sense that the stronger respon-
siveness of second-period beliefs to first-period signals in Cue is only
present for congruent signals.

Raw market prices data. Fig. 5 shows that, very similarly to the belief
elicitation experiments, second-period market prices in Market Cue are
more extreme than those in Market NoCue, following both a positive
and a negative second-period signal. Indeed, we see that market prices
are typically more extreme than the average Bayesian belief, though we
reiterate that our primary interest is the across-treatment comparison
rather than the test against the Bayesian point prediction.

Econometric analysis. More formally, we resort to Grether-style regres-
sions in which the dependent variable consists of the (normalized)
second-period log market price odds. If the market price reflected
Bayesian beliefs, the OLS regression coefficient of the second-period
signal would equal one.

Fig. 6 summarizes the results. Similarly to the belief elicitation
experiments, there are three main takeaways. First, when 𝑧 > 0, the
responsiveness of second-period market prices to the second-period
signal is significantly more pronounced in Market Cue than in Market
NoCue. Second, when 𝑧 = 0, this treatment difference disappears. Third,
within Market Cue, overreaction of second-period beliefs monotonically
increases in the number of congruent first-period signals.

Table 2 provides the regression estimates. The results confirm the
statistical significance of the three main patterns that were evident
from Fig. 6: (i) higher responsiveness of market prices to the second-
period signal in Market Cue than in Market NoCue (column (1)); (ii) this
occurs only when 𝑧 > 0 (columns (2)–(3)); and (iii) responsiveness
that significantly increases in the number of congruent signals (columns
(4)–(5)).

Result 4. Market prices react significantly more to the second-period signal
in Market Cue than in Market NoCue. This treatment difference only exists
when the number of congruent first-period signals is strictly positive.

16 Similarly to the beliefs data, when a market price is 0% or 100% we
replace it by 1% and 99%, respectively, to avoid a loss of observations from
the log odds definition. This occurs in 11 out of 1118 cases. We have verified
that the results are quantitatively almost identical when we instead drop these
observations.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385312B. Enke et al.

Fig. 5. Kernel density estimates of second-period market prices as a function of treatment and second-period signal. The horizontal green line indicates the average Bayesian
posterior across all rounds. Kernel is Epanechnikov. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

with column (4) in Table 2, we see that the causal effect of the number
of cued signals is 0.32 (𝑠.𝑒. = 0.10) in the case of individual beliefs,
while it is 0.34 (𝑠.𝑒. = 0.08) in the market experiment. These differences
are not statistically significant and suggest that subjects who rely on
associative recall in forming beliefs do not select out of the market and
hence affect market prices. In sum, we believe that these results further
underscore the economic relevance of associative memory.

Result 6. Associative-recall-based overreaction in market prices is as
large as overreaction in average individual beliefs, despite the scope for
self-selection.

6 Discussion

By presenting a set of theory-driven experiments that build a bridge
between psychological paradigms on cued recall and structured, quanti-
tative financial decision tasks, this paper has provided a causal analysis
of the role of associative memory for belief formation and market be-
havior. In doing so, we have provided two pieces of evidence that speak
to the economic relevance of associative memory. First, associative
recall generates systematic overreaction of beliefs when context and
news are correlated in a consistent fashion over time, as is likely the
case in practice. Second, we have shown that this overreaction in beliefs
leads to systematic overreaction of market prices in a betting market
environment.

Our experiments are related to an active literature that documents
overreaction in survey expectations about financial and macroeconomic
variables (e.g., Bordalo et al., 2020a). The result of overreaction in
field data is often considered to be a slight puzzle from the perspective
of laboratory research on belief formation (Benjamin, 2018). This is
because structured laboratory belief updating problems almost always
find underreaction. However, in these laboratory experiments, memory
imperfections are by design ruled out. We do not intend to claim
that associative recall can explain the entire pattern of over- and
underreaction identified in the literature. However, it is conceivable
that part of the reason why the laboratory and field literatures identify
such different patterns is that memory constraints and memorable
contexts likely play a more important role in the field, as exemplified
by Shiller’s (2017, 2019) discussion of the role of memorable narratives
and ‘‘cue-dependent forgetting’’.

While our controlled experiments provide clean evidence that asso-
ciative recall can generate overreaction to news, both at the individual
and the market level, an open question is to what extent associative
actually matters in real financial markets. Recent work (e.g., Charles,
2022a,b; Jiang et al., 2023) points to an important role of memory
biases in financial markets. At the same time, there are plausibly forces

Fig. 6. Effect of second-period signal on (normalized) second-period log market price
odds, as a function of the number of congruent first-period signals. The point estimates
are derived from regression Eq. (11), which is run separately for each value of 𝑧. We
do not show 𝑧 = 4 because there are very few observations with such a signal history.
The figure plots ̂̃𝛽1 for Market NoCue and ̂̃𝛽1 + ̂̃𝛽3 for Market Cue. Whiskers show 95%
confidence intervals, computed based on clustering at the market group level.

Result 5. Within condition Market Cue, the responsiveness of market prices
to the second-period signal increases significantly in the number of congruent
first-period signals.

Do markets attenuate associations-based overreaction? In light of the
discussion about self-selection in markets potentially attenuating the
effect of associative recall on overreaction, it is of interest to compare
the quantitative magnitude of associations-driven overreaction in the
betting market (Table 2) with that in individual beliefs (Table 1).17 The
relevant quantities of interest here are the causal effects of the treatment
and of the number of cued signals, rather than the level of overreaction
across treatments. This is because only the causal effects reflect the
impacts of associative recall, while the baseline level of overreaction in
markets and beliefs may differ for various reasons. Comparing column
(1) of Tables 1 and 2, we see that the causal effect of the treatment
on overreaction is 0.61 in individual beliefs (𝑠.𝑒. = 0.15) and 0.65 in
market prices (𝑠.𝑒. = 0.09). Similarly, comparing column (4) in Table 1

17 The Beliefs and Market experiments were conducted using within-session,

random assignment to experiments.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385313B. Enke et al.

Table 2
Overreaction in market prices as a function of treatment and signal history.

Sample:

Dependent variable:
2nd period normalized log market price odds

Cue vs. NoCue

t = 2 signal

t = 2 signal ×1 if Cue

t = 2 signal ×# of congruent t = 1 signals

1 if Cue

t = 1 signals (pos. minus neg.)

# of congruent t = 1 signals

t = 1 normalized log market price odds

Full

(1)

1.17***
(0.07)

0.65***
(0.09)

−0.034
(0.06)

0.45***
(0.04)

𝑧 = 0

(2)

1.24***
(0.12)

−0.034
(0.14)

−0.063
(0.11)

0.33***
(0.09)

𝑧 > 0

(3)

1.10***
(0.08)

0.94***
(0.11)

−0.050
(0.08)

0.44***
(0.04)

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

1118
0.63

330
0.37

788
0.69

Cue

Full

(4)

1.39***
(0.11)

0.34***
(0.08)

0.47***
(0.08)

−0.026
(0.04)

560
0.72

Full

(5)

1.33***
(0.10)

0.41***
(0.07)

−0.032
(0.04)

0.35***
(0.05)

559
0.73

Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the market group level. Following the estimating equations (11) and (12), the estimations do not
include a constant. However, we have verified that including a constant delivers almost identical results. Both the first- and the second-period log market price odds are normalized
by the log diagnosticity odds as described by Eq. (2). See Table 1 for details on the construction of each variable. * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.

that may limit the role of memory biases for financial decisions. For
instance, past return data can often be looked up and need not be
remembered, making memory constraints less relevant. This suggests
that forces other than memory biases likely contribute to overreaction
to news in financial markets (e.g., Augenblick et al., 2023; Ba et al.,
2023).

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Benjamin Enke: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Frederik Schwerter: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptu-
alization. Florian Zimmermann: Writing – review & editing, Writing
– original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Ba, Cuimin, Bohren, Aislinn, Imas, Alex, 2023. Over- and underreaction to information.

Working Paper.

Baddeley, Alan, Eysenck, Michael W., Anderson, Michael C., 2020. Memory. Routledge.
Barrero, Jose Maria, 2022. The micro and macro of managerial beliefs. J. Financ. Econ.

143 (2), 640–667.

Benjamin, Daniel J., 2018. Errors in probabilistic reasoning and judgmental biases. In:

Handbook of Behavioral Economics.

Beutel, Johannes, Weber, Michael, 2022. Beliefs and portfolios: Causal evidence.

Chicago Booth Research Paper 22–08.

Bodoh-Creed, Aaron, 2020. Mood, memory, and the evaluation of asset prices. Rev.

Finance 24 (1), 227–262.

Bordalo, Pedro, Conlon, John J., Gennaioli, Nicola, Kwon, Spencer Yongwook,
Shleifer, Andrei, 2023. Memory and probability. Q. J. Econ. 138 (1), 265–311.
Bordalo, Pedro, Gennaioli, Nicola, Ma, Yueran, Shleifer, Andrei, 2020a. Overreaction

in macroeconomic expectations. Amer. Econ. Rev. 110 (9), 2748–2782.

Bordalo, Pedro, Gennaioli, Nicola, Shleifer, Andrei, 2020b. Memory, attention, and

choice. Q. J. Econ. 135 (3), 1399–1442.

Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, Krueger, Philipp, Landier, Augustin, Thesmar, David, 2019.
Sticky expectations and the profitability anomaly. J. Finance 74 (2), 639–674.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Farhi, Emmanuel, Koijen, Ralph S.J., Krishnamurthy, Arvind,
Ludvigson, Sydney C., Lustig, Hanno, Nagel, Stefan, Piazzesi, Monika, 2021.
Perspectives on the future of asset pricing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (4), 2126–2160.

Charles, Constantin, 2022a. Memory and trading. Working Paper.
Charles, Constantin, 2022b. Memory moves markets. Available at SSRN 4019728.
Charles, Constantin, Frydman, Cary, Kilic, Mete, 2024. Insensitive investors. J. Finance,

Data availability

forthcoming.

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/545wb2gnd7/1.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103853.

References

Abarbanell, Jeffery S., Bernard, Victor L., 1992. Tests of analysts’ overreac-
tion/underreaction to earnings information as an explanation for anomalous stock
price behavior. J. Finance 47 (3), 1181–1207.

Afrouzi, Hassan, Kwon, Spencer Yongwook, Landier, Augustin, Ma, Yueran, Thes-
mar, David, 2023. Overreaction in expectations: Evidence and theory. Q. J.
Econ. 138 (3), 1713–1764.

D’Acunto, Francesco, Malmendier, Ulrike, Ospina, Juan, Weber, Michael, 2021. Ex-
posure to grocery prices and inflation expectations. J. Polit. Econ. 129 (5),
1615–1639.

Danz, David, Vesterlund, Lise, Wilson, Alistair, 2022. Belief elicitation and behavioral

incentive compatibility. Amer. Econ. Rev. 112 (9), 2851–2883.

Enke, Benjamin, Gneezy, Uri, Hall, Brian, Martin, David, Nelidov, Vadim, Offer-
man, Theo, van de Ven, Jeroen, 2021a. Cognitive biases: Mistakes or missing
stakes? Rev. Econ. Stat. 105 (4), 818–832.

Enke, Benjamin, Graeber, Thomas, 2023. Cognitive uncertainty. Q. J. Econ. 138 (4),

2021–2067.

Enke, Benjamin, Graeber, Thomas, Oprea, Ryan, 2023. Self-selection and bias in the

aggregate. Amer. Econ. Rev. 113 (7), 1933–1966.

Fudenberg, Drew, Levine, David K., et al., 2014. Learning with recency bias. Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. 111, 10826–10829.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Shleifer, Andrei, 2018. A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and

Financial Fragility. Princeton University Press.

Giglio, Stefano, Maggiori, Matteo, Stroebel, Johannes, Utkus, Stephen, 2021. Five facts

about beliefs and portfolios. Amer. Econ. Rev. 111 (5), 1481–1522.

Augenblick, Ned, Lazarus, Eben, Thaler, Michael, 2023. Overinference from weak

Goetzmann, William, Kim, Dasol, Shiller, Robert, 2022. Crash narratives. NBER Working

signals and underinference from strong signals. Working Paper.

Paper.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385314B. Enke et al.

Graeber, Thomas, Roth, Christopher, Zimmermann, Florian, 2023. Stories, statistics and

Manski, Charles F., 2006. Interpreting the predictions of prediction markets. Econ. Lett.

memory. Working Paper.

91 (3), 425–429.

Greenwood, Robin, Shleifer, Andrei, 2014. Expectations of returns and expected returns.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, 2002. A memory-based model of bounded rationality. Q. J. Econ.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (3), 714–746.

117 (3), 735–774.

Grether, David M., 1980. Bayes rule as a descriptive model: The representativeness

heuristic. Q. J. Econ. 95, 537–557.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., Hirshman, Samuel D., Imas, Alex, 2021. Ownership, learning,

and beliefs. Q. J. Econ. 136 (3), 1665–1717.

Plott, Charles R., Wit, Jorgen, Yang, Winston C., 2003. Parimutuel betting markets
as information aggregation devices: Experimental results. Econom. Theory 22 (2),
311–351.

Schacter, Daniel L., 2008. Searching for Memory: The Brain, the Mind, and the Past.

Hossain, Tanjim, Okui, Ryo, 2013. The binarized scoring rule. Rev. Econ. Stud. 80 (3),

Basic books.

984–1001.

Shiller, Robert J., 2017. Narrative economics. Am. Econ. Rev.: Pap. Proc. 107 (4),

Jiang, Zhengyang, Liu, Hongqi, Peng, Cameron, Yan, Hongjun, 2023. Investor memory

967–1004.

and biased beliefs: Evidence from the field. Working Paper.

Shiller, Robert J., 2019. Narrative Economics: How Stories Go Viral and Drive Major

Kahana, Michael Jacob, 2012. Foundations of Human Memory. OUP USA.
Kendall, Chad, Oprea, Ryan, 2018. Are biased beliefs fit to survive? An experimental

Economic Events. Princeton University Press.

Tulving, Endel, Thomson, Donald M., 1973. Encoding specificity and retrieval processes

test of the market selection hypothesis. J. Econom. Theory 176, 342–371.

in episodic memory. Psychol. Rev. 80 (5), 352.

Malmendier, Ulrike, 2021. FBBVA lecture 2020 exposure, experience, and expertise:
Why personal histories matter in economics. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 19 (6),
2857–2894.

Wachter, Jessica A., Kahana, Michael J., 2019. A retrieved-context theory of financial

decisions. Available at SSRN.

Wilson, Andrea, 2014. Bounded memory and biases

in information processing.

Malmendier, Ulrike, Nagel, Stefan, 2015. Learning from inflation experiences. Q. J.

Econometrica 82 (6), 2257–2294.

Econ. 131 (1), 53–87.

Wolfers, Justin, Zitzewitz, Eric, 2004. Prediction markets. J. Econ. Perspect. 18 (2),

Malmendier, Ulrike, Wachter, Jessica A., 2021. Memory of past experiences and

107–126.

economic decisions. Available at SSRN 4013583.

Wolfers, Justin, Zitzewitz, Eric, 2006. Prediction Markets in Theory and Practice.

National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385315