Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Crowdsourcing peer information to change spending behavior✩
Francesco D’Acunto a, Alberto G. Rossi a,1, Michael Weber b,c,∗
a McDonough School of Business, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA
b Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
c NBER, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We isolate the information channel of peer effects in consumption in a setting that excludes a role for common
shocks or social pressure—a spending panel paired with crowdsourced information about anonymous ‘‘peers’’
elicited at different times. Consumers converge to peers’ spending, and more so when peer signals are more
informative. Convergence is asymmetric: within 12 months of information provision, overspenders close 17%
and underspenders 5% of their gap relative to peers. We exploit the quasi-random assignment to peer groups in
an instrumental-variable strategy and implement an experiment for external validity. Our results are consistent
with information-based theories of overconsumption.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/4kck86prjg/2

JEL classification:
D12
D14
D91
E22
G41

Keywords:
Social finance
Visibility bias
Conspicuous consumption
Robo-advising
FinTech
Information economics
Household finance

1. Introduction

Low savings limit the wealth accumulation of households, many
of whom reach the time of retirement holding insufficient resources
to maintain their pre-retirement lifestyle (e.g., see Banks et al., 1998;
Bernheim et al., 2001; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007). Beyond financial
constraints, consumers often lack the information and sophistication
needed to form beliefs about optimal spending (D’Acunto et al., 2019a).
Consumers might thus rely on rules of thumb such as conforming to

the choices of people whose demographic characteristics are similar to
theirs as if such choices provided valuable information about optimal
spending (Bikhchandani et al., 1998; Kaustia and Knüpfer, 2012; Agar-
wal and Qian, 2014; Bailey et al., 2018; Maturana and Nickerson
(2020).

In this paper, we empirically isolate this information channel of peer
effects in a unique field setting that, by construction, rules out any
role for common shocks across peers or peer pressure and in which

✩

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. This research was conducted with restricted access to data from Status Money Inc. The views expressed here
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Status Money Inc., which had no right to review the content of this paper. We are indebted
to the founders, Majd Maksad and Korash Hernandez, for providing us with invaluable feedback. For very helpful comments and discussions, we thank Sumit
Agarwal, Marieke Bos, Stephen Dimmock, David Hirshleifer, Yi Huang, Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, Samuli Kn "upfer, Tao Li, Chen Lin, Christian Lundblad, Michaela
Pagel, Wenlan Qian, Tianyue Ruan, Patricio Toro, Michael Ungeheuer, Qi (Jacky) Zhang, and conference and seminar participants at the 2023 ASSA Annual
Meetings, 2022 AI & Big Data in Finance Research (ABFR) Forum, 2022 ABFER Webinar Series, 2020 AFA, 2020 GSU-RFS Fintech Conference, 2019 TAU Finance
Conference, 2019 Santiago Finance Workshop, 2019 Miami Behavioral Finance Conference, the 2019 EFA, 2019 Helsinki Finance Summit, 2019 Cherry Blossom
Conference, 2019 Olin Household Finance Conference, 2019 Tsinghua SEM Finance Workshop, and 2019 Guanghua FinTech Conference, as well as at CMU, IMF,
NSU, SMU, NTU, HKU, CUHK, HKUST, the Investor and Financial Education Council of Hong Kong, ESSEC, UIBE, IFEC, Tinbergen Institute, University of St.,
Gallen, and University of Bergen. D’Acunto acknowledges financial support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, United States and Weber from the
Fama Research Fund, United States at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. All errors are our own.

∗ Corresponding author at: Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

E-mail addresses:

francesco.dacunto@georgetown.edu (F. D’Acunto), agr60@georgetown.edu (A.G. Rossi), michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu (M. Weber).

1 Fellow of the Luohan Academy.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103858
Received 18 January 2023; Received in revised form 25 April 2024; Accepted 26 April 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103858Availableonline22May20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 1. Distance from peers’ spending and change in spending: Raw data.
Fig. 1 is a binned scatterplot of dollar changes in spending (y-axis) for users who sign up to Status Money three months after signup relative to three months before. Dollar changes
are the residuals from regressing actual changes on month-of-year signup dummies to account for seasonality in spending. The 𝑥-axis sorts users based on the difference in spending
with respect to peers over the 30 days before signup, which we standardize to have a unit standard deviation. The binned scatterplot divides the 20,679 users into 80 groups.
The solid lines plot the fitted values of a threshold regression that estimates different linear regression coefficients below and above the level of zero distance from the peers.

connections among peers are not formed endogenously. We exploit
a transaction-level panel dataset of spending choices paired with a
FinTech tool (Status Money) that provides users with information about
the overall spending of anonymous demographically similar consumers
(‘‘peers’’). The information is crowdsourced from the account-level
data of a large representative US population outside the Status Money
platform. In this setting, users do not know peers’ identities and do not
interact with peers socially, and hence socialization or peer pressure
due to direct observation of peers’ choices have no scope.2 Moreover,
the information on peers’ spending is not measured at the same time
at which users make their own choices, which dismisses a role for
common shocks that both users and peers might face as a potential
explanation for correlated choices between the two groups. Because
the extent to which peer groups’ characteristics are similar to users’
characteristics varies across users, the informativeness of peer signals
varies in our setting—a feature that allows testing whether users’
reaction to peer signals depends on their informativeness.

Upon subscribing to the platform, users provide a set of demo-
graphic characteristics that include their annual income, age, home-
ownership status, location, and type of residence. The platform ob-
tains users’ credit scores via credit reports as well as the pre-signup
transaction-level spending history directly from the financial accounts
users link. We can thus compute directly users’ pre- and post-signup
monthly spending. The platform matches each user automatically with
one of a set of pre-defined peer groups constructed based on US
representative transaction-level data outside the platform. Users are not
aware of the rules used to match them to a peer group.3

Fig. 1 is a raw-data plot that motivates our analysis. In this binned
scatterplot, each point represents approximately 250 users. On the 𝑦-
axis, we plot the average change in monthly dollar spending for users
in the three months after signup relative to the three months before
signup. On the 𝑥-axis, we sort users based on the standardized distance

2 As we discuss in more detail below, users who learn they spend more
than their peers might be subject to ‘‘peer pressure’’ in the sense that they feel
pressured to conform to the social norm of thrift that they learn exists in a
population demographically similar to them.

3 After signup, users can set up additional peer groups. Our analysis does
not use such self-designed groups because less than 2% of users in our sample
set them up. Even for the latter users, information from the pre-defined groups
is always visible.

of their spending relative to the peer group’s average spending over
the 30 days before signup.4 The distance from peers is positive if users
spent more relative to the average peer spending before signup and
negative otherwise. The raw data reveal three patterns. First, users
adjust their spending toward the level of their peers’ spending after
signup, irrespective of whether they spent more or less than their peers.
Second, the size of the change is monotonically related to the distance
from peers in both directions. Third, the reaction is asymmetric—users
above their peers change their spending by more than users at a similar
distance below their peers.5

We show that the static asymmetric effect in Fig. 1 holds dy-
namically: both overspenders and underspenders keep adjusting their
spending toward the levels of their peers over the 12 months after
signup. Overspenders react more, though: they close their gap by 17%,
whereas under-spenders only by 5%.

A potential mechanical relationship between the observed change
in spending and users’ distance from peers’ spending before signup is
an important concern with the baseline facts: users who face especially
large or small expenses in the pre-signup period might merely revert to
their usual levels of spending resembling a reaction to peer information.
Moreover, users might be reacting to other pieces of information or
other features of the platform rather than to the information about
peers’ spending. The raw-data patterns also face a set of endogeneity
concerns. For instance, users might first decide to change their spending
and only sign up to the platform to use the income aggregation feature
and monitor their transactions (e.g., see D’Acunto et al., 2019b; Rossi
and Utkus, 2020).

We tackle these concerns in the second part of the paper. We first
show directly that mean reversion cannot drive our results. The facts
are robust to controlling directly for users’ pre-signup spending as well

4 Several platform features have changed over time and especially after the
sample period for which we have information, which ends in January 2019.
In Section 2, we discuss in detail the features and timing of these changes
based on the timeline the platform founders shared with us and official press
releases. All the features we discuss in the paper only refer to what users saw
during our sample period.

5 The raw-data results assume that spending adjustments differ systemati-
cally above and below the level of peer spending rather than based on other
values. We verify below that the cross-sectional spending changes have a kink
at the peer level by estimating endogenous threshold regressions.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038582F. D’Acunto et al.

as to using their spending levels two months or three months before
signup to compute the distance from peers, thus dismissing unusual
spending in the weeks before signup as a potential explanation for our
results.6 The dynamics of the effects over time are also inconsistent
with mean reversion because the reaction builds up over time for both
overspenders and underspenders.

We then establish that users react to the information about peer
spending rather than to other information they see on the platform,
such as the average spending of all US consumers and information
about users’ own average income. We do so by considering cases for
whom peer spending and other pieces of information predict reactions
of opposite signs. This analysis also helps reconcile our results with
earlier research that did not detect substantial effects of peer informa-
tion on households’ financial choices (e.g., see Beshears et al., 2015):
even in our setting, similar to earlier work, providing information about
broad groups with varied demographics, such as the average of all US
consumers, is uninformative and has no effect on consumers’ choices.
To tackle the broader endogeneity concerns directly, we move on
to propose an instrumental-variable (IV) analysis that exploits a design
feature of the platform—the quasi-random assignment of users to peer
groups based on threshold rules that users ignore. Because users do
not know the assignment rules, they cannot strategically manipulate
their reported demographics, for instance if they wanted to avoid
negative news about their spending relative to peers. And indeed, we
show that the pre-signup spending levels of similar users who end up
being assigned to different peer groups are indistinguishable. The IV
strategy confirms our baseline results. Users who look similar along
all dimensions we observe, including pre-signup spending, converge to
the different average spending of the peer groups to which they are
assigned. We corroborate the IV results through a placebo IV analysis
and a set of falsification tests.

We also exploit this identification strategy to assess the role of the
informativeness of peer signals by designing heterogeneity tests that
compare the reactions of peers who observe more or less informative
peer signals. In these tests, channels other than peer information, such
as design features of the platform, are kept constant because they are
equally active for all users. Instead, we exploit design features of the
platform that allow for variation of peer groups’ informativeness, such
as the precision with which users’ characteristics are matched to those
of the peer group and peer group sizes. Across all these dimensions, we
find that users who are matched with more informative peer groups
react substantially more after signup, whereas users who are matched
with less informative groups barely react. Users thus do not just anchor
their monthly spending to a number they read on the platform, but
they interpret the number as material to their choices only when the
group of consumers based on which such number is computed is more
precisely tailored to their own characteristics.

We then move on to tackle another issue that research based on
spending aggregators cannot address directly—external validity. Be-
cause Status Money is marketed as a tool that provides comparisons
with peers, the population that selects into this service might be more
sensitive than the average US consumer to the differences between
their spending and peers’ spending. This issue hinders us from drawing
inference about the effects of providing peer spending information to
the broader population based on our baseline results.

To tackle this external-validity concern, we implemented a ran-
domized control trial (RCT), which we ran on a representative US
population that we recruited online without any mention of peers, peer

6 We do not argue that mean reversion in spending does not exist. In fact,
we do find evidence of mean reversion in spending over time. What we argue
is mean reversion is inconsequential to our results and that users do react to
the information about peers above and beyond other changes in their spending
profile, including mean reversion.

information, or household finance. Similar to Status Money, we gave re-
spondents truthful information regarding the spending choices of demo-
graphically similar consumers and tested how such information affected
respondents’ spending plans in a within-subject experimental design.
Following the literature on consumption and saving decisions (Parker
and Souleles, 2019), we first elicited respondents’ marginal propensities
to consume (MPC) out of an unexpected reimbursement, which scales
directly respondents’ spending by their (unobserved) income.7 We then
provided information on the MPC of consumers in the same income
bracket as the respondent (income peers) and elicited the respondent’s
MPC again. This non-selected population responds to peer spending
information in a strikingly similar way as Status Money users. In par-
ticular, all respondents react to peer information, but the reaction is
asymmetric and stronger for overspenders than underspenders.8

Stressing what we do not claim in this paper is also important. We
do not claim the information users obtain captures precisely the actual
spending of their peers or that the rules used to create peer groups
are optimal. In fact, our setting includes cases in which peer groups’
characteristics are more or less similar to users’ characteristics, which
is a crucial feature to assess the role of peer signals’ informativeness.

Moreover, we do not claim that reacting to peer information is
optimal in our or other contexts. Related, our paper has no nor-
mative implications in terms of whether reacting to peers’ spending
increases or decreases users’ welfare. The asymmetric reactions we
uncover, though, suggest that providing consumers with information
about the spending of a targeted population that shares the same
demographic characteristics might moderate excessive spending in the
aggregate. Targeted peer information might thus be used as a low-cost
communication-based policy to manage aggregate consumption and
savings (D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber, 2022).

1.1. Contributions to the literature

Our paper contributes to several strands of literature in economics
and finance. First and foremost, we contribute to research that studies
the role of peer effects on economic decision-making, that is, the extent
to which consumers’ choices conform to those of peers. In particular,
our paper aims to assess the existence and estimate the economic mag-
nitude of the information channel of peer effects, whereby consumers
conform their choices to those of peers because they think they learn
about optimal decision-making based on peers’ choices. Isolating this
information channel of peer effects is notoriously difficult for at least
two reasons. First, the literature finds that socialization and common
shocks might explain correlated choices across peers even if agents
do not react actively to peers’ choices (Manski, 1993). Whereas this
concern can be tackled by tailoring convincing causal identification
designs, a second important concern is that peers’ choices might gen-
erate peer pressure above and beyond providing informative signals
(e.g., see Mas and Moretti, 2009) and hence even carefully identified
reactions to observing the choices of peers might confound these two
effects.

7 We followed the literature and elicited MPCs rather than asking for the
full set of individual transactions across spending categories, which would
have been too burdensome for respondents and would have likely generated
substantial measurement error.

8 The RCT also made it possible to elicit demographic information and
economic preferences and beliefs, which were not available in our baseline
observational data (D’Acunto, Rauter, Scheuch, and Weber, 2020c; D’Acunto,
Malmendier, and Weber, 2021; Coibion et al., 2022; Coibion et al., 2023).
We find that demographic dimensions typically related to spending attitudes,
such as gender, marital status, number of children, as well as risk aversion, and
patience, do not relate to systematically different reactions to peer information,
which further reduces the concern that our baseline results are not externally
valid.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038583F. D’Acunto et al.

For instance, Allcott (2011) and Allcott and Rogers (2014) study
the Opower experiment, whereby households were provided infor-
mation about the energy consumption of their neighbors and their
energy consumption was subsequently monitored. They find that high-
consumption households cut their energy consumption when they learn
that neighbors consume less, an effect that might be due to learning
about optimal energy consumption from peers’ signals (information
channel), due to avoiding being perceived as overconsumers by peers
the next time information is distributed (social pressure channel), or to
both channels.

The literature has proposed settings to isolate the information chan-
nel of peer effects (Bursztyn et al. (2014), Maturana and Nickerson
(2019), Ouimet and Tate (2020), Agarwal et al. (2021)). Our paper’s
contribution in this area is the study of a setting that, by construction,
cannot generate peer effects in the form of common shocks or social
pressure. On the one hand, the peers in our setting are anonymous; that
is, users observe information about the spending of a representative set
of individuals with similar demographic characteristics without know-
ing their identities or being observed by them. Therefore, whether users
update their spending behavior or not, none of the individuals whose
information was part of the signal will ever observe the change in
spending behavior. Thus no scope exists in this setting for reacting due
to social pressure. On the other hand, the app’s information about peer
spending is static and was obtained for a representative US consumer
cohort in July 2017. In contrast, users’ spending behavior was observed
from August 2017 until the end of our sample period in January 2019.
By construction, our users and peers do not make contemporaneous
spending decisions, and hence potential common shocks faced by all
peers at the same time cannot explain our results.

in

finance

household

consumption

The paper also fits into a growing literature on the role of FinTech
choices
and
applications
(see D’Acunto and Rossi (2023, 2024) for recent reviews of this litera-
ture). FinTech applications have been shown to modify the consump-
tion, saving, and investment choices of households in the direction of
those of rational economic agents through at least three channels. First,
they provide consumers with information about their own characteris-
tics through income aggregation features (e.g., see Olafsson and Pagel
(2017) and Lee (2019)), as well as information about other economic
agents, like in this paper, and about macroeconomic variables. Second,
they reduce distortions in beliefs about own characteristics, others’
characteristics, and the aggregate economy (e.g., see Gargano and Rossi
(2020)). Third, they reduce the transaction costs that have been shown
to lead to inertia in several realms of household decision-making, which
can take the form of monetary costs (Reher and Sokolinski, 2021) as
well as cognitive and psychological costs (e.g., see Chak et al. (2022)).
The empirical results in our paper also speak to the theoretical
literature on peer effects on consumption and saving choices, especially
theories of overconsumption and undersaving behavior. Overall, we
note that the implications of visibility bias for consumption can ratio-
nalize the full set of results we document empirically (Han, Hirshleifer,
and Walden (2019)).9 We discuss the implications of our results for
extant models in Section 9.

2. Institutional setting

In this section, we discuss the characteristics of Status Money, the
signup procedure, and the information users observe after signup. We
also discuss how the platform (which we label ‘‘app’’ thereafter) has
evolved over time, including features that a contemporary reader might
observe but did not exist during our sample period.

2.1. Purpose of the app and signup process

Similar to other FinTech apps in the consumer-finance space in the
US and abroad, Status Money provides an income-aggregation feature,
which allows users to visualize their full balance sheet in a simple and
dynamic way and to access a set of metrics about their finances, which
would be hard to compute for a household without a holistic view of all
their debt, credit, and investment accounts (D’Acunto and Rossi, 2021).
Status Money also shows users how consumers similar to them in
terms of observable characteristics (peers) manage their finances. The
information about peers is crowdsourced from proprietary transaction-
level data for a large sample of individuals outside the app and repre-
sentative of the US population. The app thus enables users to obtain
complex information that they could only acquire and process on their
own if they had access to large-scale proprietary transaction-level data
and if they were able to manage and analyze such big data.

Importantly, peers in this setting are not individuals that interact
socially with users and users do not know their peers’ identities. Users
know that peer groups are defined based on an anonymous repre-
sentative population outside the app. This feature departs from most
of the research studying peer effects and is crucial to argue that our
analysis isolates the information channel of peer effects relative to
other channels that transmit peer effects, such as common shocks faced
by peer groups, socialization, or peer pressure stemming from direct
interaction.

When signing up, users provide their date of birth, their annual
income, and their housing type—whether they own or rent. Users are
then prompted to insert their address and the last four digits of their
Social Security number. This information allows the app to connect
to a credit bureau that returns all of the users’ credit-score-related
information.10 Finally, the app asks users to link their checking and
savings accounts, their credit card and other debt accounts, and their
taxable and non-taxable investment accounts.

Users’ incentive to link their financial accounts consists of accessing
the aggregator features of the app, which are only meaningful if users
link all their accounts. Consistent with the relevance of this incentive,
the users in our sample link, on average 5 accounts, and the median
user links 4 accounts.

2.2. Peer groups construction

For each user, the app matches a peer group from a large set of
pre-designed peer groups. Peer-group matching depends on the user’s
age, income, location and type, credit score, and housing type, and
each group must include a minimum of 5000 underlying observations.
In Fig. 2, we provide an example of the screenshot that Status Money
users observe about their own characteristics (Panel (a)) and the char-
acteristics based on which the peer group is defined (Panel (b)). In this
fictitious example, the user is 42 years old, has an annual income of
$140K, lives in New York, has a credit score of 769, and is a renter. The
peer group assigned to this user contains individuals whose age ranges
between 40 and 49, whose income ranges from $100K to $150K, who
live in New York, pay rent, and have a credit score that ranges between
720 and 779.

The constraint of at least 5000 observations underlying each peer
group is important for our analysis because it varies the precision with
which peer groups’ average characteristics match users’ characteristics.
Varying precision produces variation in the informativeness of peers’
spending information across users. For instance, Fig. 2 shows that, in
order to cross the threshold of 5000 peer observations, the fictitious
user needs to be matched with peers living anywhere in New York and
not just the urban areas (location type: ‘‘All’’). Another New York urban

9 We would like to thank David Hirshleifer for helping us draft this section

10 We as researchers do not observe any individually-identifiable information

based on a very detailed conference discussion.

about Status Money’s users.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038584F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 2. Sample peer group assignment for a demo account.
This figure shows the graphic users observed during our sample period after signing up to the app, providing their individual characteristics, and being assigned to a peer group.
Note that the users are required to report exact values for continuous variables such as their age, income, and credit score. After being assigned to a peer group, users are shown
the characteristics of the peer group to which they are assigned as in the reported graphic.

user whose demographic characteristics allow finding 5000 peers living
in the urban area would be matched to a more precise peer group. The
width of the ranges of quantitative demographic characteristics, such as
income, also varies across users, and broader ranges imply less precise
peer group comparisons. We will exploit these features in Section 7 to
test for the heterogeneity of users’ reactions to peer signals based on
peer groups’ informativeness.

2.3. Main characteristics of the app during our sample period

Once the user enrolls, the app automatically retrieves informa-
tion from her financial accounts. The app stores all transactions and
computes the user’s net worth as the difference between assets and
liabilities. To give the reader a sense of the information users observe,
we describe the content of the home page below based on the app’s
appearance during our sample period.

The main feature of the home page is the comparison of the user’s
spending with her peers’ spending. Fig. 3 displays the salient graphic
that compares the user’s own daily spending based on daily transactions
with the projected average daily spending of the peer group and the
US national average. The screenshot was taken on October 30, 2018.
We argue that this picture captures the main feature of the home page
because during our sample period and in both smartphone and desktop
versions of the app it was the first item users would see when logging
into the app, it was placed at the center of the screen, and occupied
most of the width of the screen.

The top part of Fig. 3 shows the user’s total spending next to the
average peer spending and the national average. The blue line presents
the user’s cumulative spending over the course of the month until
October 30. It also presents a forecast of total spending until the end

of the month. On the same graph, the light- and dark-red lines present
the peer and national average cumulative spending over the month.
The app also displays as a gray-dotted line the user’s average monthly
income flows. This feature is unlikely to provide new information to
most users and especially to employees with a fixed salary.

Note that users’ spending is based on their own daily transactions,
whereas peers’ and US national average information are computed
using a proprietary algorithm that aggregates spending information
for a large sample of US consumers whose transactions Status Money
observes. These transactions are aggregated to the monthly level and
projected linearly for each day of the month, and are not computed
on a daily basis. This difference in the frequency with which users’
and peers’ data are processed is not relevant to the scope of our tests
because it does not vary by over- or underspenders, users above or
below the income thresholds, which we exploit for identification, or
by levels of informativeness, which we use in our heterogeneity tests.
The bottom of the home page provides links to more comprehensive
statistics regarding users’ debts, assets, net worth, and credit score (see
Fig. A.1 in the Online Appendix). Below, we show that whereas users
react to the salient information about peers’ spending, they do not
appear to react to information about peers’ debts, assets, or net worth.11
In pages different from the home page, which can be accessed
through hyperlinks, users can obtain more detailed information about
the comparison of their monthly spending with the average peer spend-
ing not only for the month in which users sign up but also for each of

11 This non-reaction could be due to the facts that users do not click on the
links at the bottom of the page and hence do not see this information, or that
adjusting assets and liabilities is more complicated than adjusting spending,
among other possible explanations, which we cannot disentangle empirically.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038585F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 3. Top of Status Money home page during our sample period.
This figure shows the top part of the homepage of Status Money—the first image users see when signing in to the app during our sample period. The blue line reports the user’s
spending aggregated across her accounts based on transaction-level data and varies at the daily level throughout the month (x-axis). The orange line represent a daily linear
projection of the average monthly spending of the peer groups assigned to the user, which is based on monthly transaction-level data for a representative US population. The
red line represents a daily linear projection for the average monthly spending of all observations in the same representative US population. The horizontal dashed line represents
user’s average monthly income inflows. On top of the graph, users read their daily cumulative amount of spending within the month at the time they login to the app as well
as the projected cumulative amount of spending for peers and the overall representative population. Note that some of this figure’s features, including its position and size, have
changed after our sample period, as we show in the Online Appendix.

the 6 months before sign up. We do not know whether users click on
such hyperlinks and hence whether they observe the longer comparison
of monthly spending relative to the information on the home page,
which we use in our baseline analysis, but in the data we find a large
degree of persistence in whether users are classified as overspenders
based on their most-recent monthly spending or any of the previous
months. In fact, the within-individual correlation of the overspending
assignment variable across the three months before signup is 73.3%.
Because comparisons for previous months are typically similar to the
most recent comparisons users see on the homepage, observing the full
history should if anything reinforce the signal about peers’ spending
levels. Consistently, as we discuss below, when we assign users to
overspender or underspender status based on their spending in any
of the available months before signup we find results that are barely
distinguishable from our baseline analysis.

As is the case for most FinTech apps, the graphics and features of
Status Money have evolved over time. In Fig. A.4 of the Online Ap-
pendix, we report the timeline of the changes that might be relevant to
our analysis. In essence, any relevant change, such as the introduction
of alerts, cash incentives, and social feeds only happened after the end
of our sample period – which starts in July 2017 and ends in January
2019 – and therefore cannot affect our analysis. For completeness, in
Online Appendix A.1, we provide a more detailed discussion about the
features that were introduced after our data sample ends and before
the paper’s publication, which a reader might see when accessing the
app even if they were not present during our sample period.

3. Data

The first group of variables we observe is the set of users’ self-
reported demographic characteristics at the time of signup, including
users’ age, income, whether the user owns or rents the house in which
she lives, the city in which the user lives, and her credit score.

The second set of characteristics we observe relates to peers. For
each user, we observe the average characteristics of the peer group
computed by Status Money. As we discussed above, the app does not
use the characteristics of other app users to construct peer groups, but
uses external proprietary data of a representative set of US consumers.
This procedure rules out that any selection in the types of consumers
who sign up are reflected in the average demographics of the peer
groups. Note also that the information on peer spending was static
during our sample period, that is, peer-group spending values were
collected for a specific historical month (July 2017) and were not
dynamically updated. Because spending is seasonal throughout the
year, and July is one of the highest expense months in the year,
this procedure contributes to explaining why the majority of users
in our sample underspend relative to their peers. Hence, we have to
account for seasonality in spending in our empirical analyses below.
The demographics we observe for peers include their average credit
score, average level of debt, average value of assets, average net worth,
and average income. Finally, we observe the number of individuals
populating each group.

We also observe information about the usage of Status Money ac-
counts. These variables include the signup date, the number of monthly
logins, and the number of financial accounts users link to the app.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038586F. D’Acunto et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics.

Age
Credit Score
Home Ownership
Annual Income ($)
Distance Peers
Assets ($)
Debts ($)
Spending (30 Days, $)
Spending (60 Days, $)
Spending (90 Days, $)
Urban
Suburban
Rural

Age
Credit Score
Home Ownership
Annual Income ($)
Distance Peers
Assets ($)
Debts ($)
Spending (30 Days, $)
Spending (60 Days, $)
Spending (90 Days, $)
Low Similarity to Peers
High Number of Peers
High Peer Group Income Width
Had More Peer Info Before

Age
Annual Income ($)
Distance Peers (pre-COVID)
Distance Peers (during COVID)
Male
College
Partnered
Children
Liberal
Financially Literate
Change MPC (pre-COVID)
Change MPC (during COVID)

Panel A. Main sample

Obs

20,679
19,051
20,679
20,594
20,679
17,190
19,392
20,679
20,679
20,679
13,509
13,509
13,509

Mean

32
736
0.39
92,633
−0.53
41,101
20,466
4963
4886
4670
0.40
0.34
0.26

St. Dev.

p10

8
74
0.49
62,838
0.97
63,870
45,545
4007
4040
3894
0.49
0.47
0.44

24
630
0
34,000
−1.59
511
218
840
820
698
0
0
0

Panel B. Identification sample

Obs

5629
5236
5629
5629
5629
4616
5290
5629
5629
5629
5629
2600
4552
3613

Mean

31
730
0.36
71,917
−0.47
26,878
13,680
4375
4332
4060
0.38
0.62
0.47
0.72

St. Dev.

p10

8
76
0.48
33,399
0.91
39,880
28,721
3505
3555
3340
0.48
0.48
0.50
0.45

24
624
0
33,000
−1.47
381
211
783
798
657
0
0
0
0

Panel C. Randomized-control-trial sample

Obs

1014
1015
1015
1015
1004
1014
1010
1008
1015
1015
1015
1015

Mean

38.03
67,002
1.33
−3.57
0.57
0.73
0.66
0.35
0.51
0.46
−0.89
−0.27

St. Dev.

p10

10.70
40,797
31.68
30.93
0.50
0.44
0.47
0.48
0.50
0.50
11.14
10.51

24.00
27,499
−40.00
−43.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
−11.00
−10.00

p25

27
704
0
50,000
−1.04
2208
875
2,039
1971
1805
0
0
0

p25

26
693
0
46,644
−0.96
1720
789
1931
1868
1694
0
0
0
0

p25

24.00
27,499
−23.00
−24.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
−1.00
0.00

p50

30
756
0
75,000
−0.53
10,699
3335
3877
3736
3589
0
0
0

p50

30
751
0
70,000
−0.51
8015
3012
3530
3427
3241
0
1
0
1

p50

40.50
54,999
2.00
−4.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

p75

35
790
1
115,000
−0.02
47,365
11,320
6695
6521
6351
1
1
1

p75

34
784
1
95,000
−0.00
32,542
9928
5777
5645
5410
1
1
1
1

p75

40.50
54,999
27.00
18.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00

p90

42
810
1
170,500
0.61
142,985
56,145
11,107
11,106
10,680
1
1
1

p90

40
807
1
100,000
0.59
92,671
31,862
8949
9038
8393
1
1
1
1

p90

55.00
137,500
42.00
38.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
9.00
10.00

This table reports summary statistics of the variables that enter our analysis across the three samples we use—the main sample of Status Money users for the baseline
analysis (Panel A), the identification sample for the instrumental-variable analysis (Panel B), and the randomized-control-trial sample for the external-validity
analysis (Panel C). For each variable, we report the number of observations, the sample average, the sample standard deviation, and various percentiles of the
distribution.

Finally, we observe data on users’ and peer groups’ spending
amounts, which represent the main variables in our analyses. We
observe users’ spending for up to 3 months before signup and up to
12 months after signup.

3.1. Sample selection

To ensure our working sample includes individuals for which we
meaningfully observe inflows and outflows before and after signup,
we only consider users who have linked at least one spending account
because, by construction, we cannot observe the spending behavior of
those who linked no accounts.

Moreover, we select the raw sample according to a set of steps that
are inspired by the sample selection used in earlier app-based research
in household finance (e.g., see Olafsson and Pagel (2018) and Ganong
and Noel (2019)).12 In Table A.1, we show that the baseline results are

12 We thank Michaela Pagel and Byoung Hyoun-Hwang for raising points

that guided our sample selection steps.

similar in the unrestricted and selected samples. Despite the similarity
of the results, we proceed with the sample selection steps to guarantee
consistency with the empirical analysis earlier research has performed
using other income-aggregating apps.

First, we only include users whose number of linked accounts does
not change through the 90 days after signup. This step is important
for two reasons. On the one hand, users might link one account at
signup and start linking other accounts over time, as they build trust in
the app. In this case, we might miss the reaction of users in accounts
that were not linked at the time of signup or we might categorize as
an increase in spending the mere fact that we observe more spending
sources for the user over time. On the other hand, a concern with the
FinTech apps in the literature is that users’ accounts might be de-linked
from the app due to inactivity, changing passwords, or other technical
issues related to their account settings. Although these types of cases
are dropped from the app, and hence we should not observe them, to
avoid any risk that we falsely categorize as a drop in users’ spending
a mere delinking of an account, we drop users whose number of
accounts linked changes over time after signup. By limiting the sample

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038587F. D’Acunto et al.

to users whose number of accounts does not change, we eliminate both
possibilities from the analysis.

Second, we only include users with at least one login to the app after
signup. This step further alleviates the concern that, because of users’
inaction, the app might not observe users’ activity and categorize their
spending as declining. Status Money has not detected this type of issue
on their app, but because this issue was documented in other income
aggregators, we also implement this selection step in our main working
sample.

Third, we only include users who spend at least $100 per month in
food-related transactions during the sample period. This step ensures
that we do not keep individuals who are not actively using the accounts
they link for spending purposes. We consider food-related expenses be-
cause after the third selection step all users have at least one transaction
categorized as food expense each month after signup.

We also verify that no users are duplicates, that is, individuals who
might have opened different accounts at different points in time, for
instance, because they forgot their login credentials. Repeated accounts
would overestimate the statistical significance of our results. To identify
duplicates, we search for individual accounts with the same balances at
the end of each month and who connect from the same IP address and
have the same demographic characteristics.

annual income and monthly spending, which equal $71,917 and $4375,
respectively. Panel B also describes four dummy variables that we use
in the analysis of the causal effects of peer spending on users’ spending
based on the informativeness of the signals users observe. We define
and discuss these variables, some of which are defined only for a subset
of our sample and their interpretation in Section 7.

Panel C of Table 1 describes our RCT sample, which we introduce
and discuss in detail in Section 8. The RCT allows us to elicit a set
of demographic characteristics that are not available in observational
data but can be important determinants of spending behavior according
to earlier research, such as risk preferences, beliefs, gender, education
levels, marital status and family size, political views, and financial
literacy. At the same time, in the RCT sample we do not observe actual
spending from transaction-level observational data, but we need to rely
on subjects’ reported levels of spending and especially on their marginal
propensities to consume out of hypothetical windfalls, whose elicitation
we discuss in Section 8.

4. Peer information and spending: Raw-data evidence

We start our empirical analysis by describing the changes in spend-
ing after users observe their peers’ spending relative to before signup.
We then estimate the dynamics of the change in spending over time.

3.2. Summary statistics

4.1. Reaction to peer information at signup

The users in our sample are spread across the whole US (please see
Fig. A.5 in the Online Appendix for a map of users’ location), which
is important to ensure that individuals with varied demographic and
social backgrounds, such as different attitudes toward spending and
saving, enter the sample (see D’Acunto, 2018 and D’Acunto, 2019).

Panel A of Table 1 reports the user characteristics in the main
sample. For each variable, we report the number of observations,
averages, standard deviations, and a set of percentiles. The average user
is 32 years old, with a standard deviation of about eight years. This
figure indicates that Status Money users are younger than the average
US population, which is common for app-based samples. The average
credit score is 736, which is higher than the average credit score for the
US population.13 Thirty-nine percent of users are homeowners, which
is below the US average, in line with the fact that Status Money users
are, on average, younger than the average US consumer.

In terms of annual income, the average user earns a little more
than $92,000 per year, but this average figure masks substantial het-
erogeneity as the large standard deviation suggests ($62,838). The
identification sample in Panel B of Table 1, which excludes high-income
users by design as we explain below, reveals that the baseline sample
in Panel A has a fat right tail in terms of income. In that sample,
the average income is $71,917, which is substantially lower than the
average in the main sample and close to the US average. Panel A of
Table 1 further shows that in the baseline sample, monthly spending in
the 30 days before signup equals $4963, with a standard deviation of
$4007, and monthly spending is similar in the second or third month
before signup.

Panel B of Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the identifi-
cation sample we use in Section 6. This sample contains individuals
whose income ranges between $6000 below and $2000 above each
income threshold used to compute peer groups: $35K, $50K, $75K,
$100K, and $150K. The summary statistics of this identification sample
are in line with the ones of the baseline sample, with the exception of

13 Although we do not have access to administrative data on credit scores for
a representative US sample, commercial reports indicate lower average credit
scores for representative US samples. For instance, VantageScore computes
that, in February 2021, a month that is close in time to the sample period we
use in this paper, the average credit score was 698. 730 is the 55th percentile
of the credit score distribution.

Our baseline analysis tests whether two pieces of information users
receive at signup – whether they spend more or less than their peers,
and to what extent their spending differs from their peers’ average
spending – relate to users’ subsequent spending behavior. We first
compute the average monthly spending of each user for the 90 days
before signup and the 90 days after signup and measure the change in
aggregate spending across the two periods.

Because spending is seasonal and varies systematically across time
within a year, we regress user-level spending on a full set of month-of-
year dummy variables for the month in which the user signed up and
use the residuals from this regression as the seasonally-adjusted level
of spending at the user level.

Fig. 1 in the introduction showed a graphical depiction of the
change in users’ spending after and before signup as a function of
users’ distance from the level of peer spending. We define distance from
peers as the difference between user’s spending in the month before
signup and the spending of the assigned peer group. We classify users
that spent more than their peers as overspenders, even though this
terminology does not imply that users are deviating from an optimal
spending path or that they are making a mistake. Fig. 1 is a binned
scatterplot that divides our 20,679 users into 80 groups. To ease the
interpretation, we standardize the ‘‘Distance from Peers’’ 𝑥-axis variable
to have a unit standard deviation. Fig. 1 documents three features of
the raw data. First, both underspenders and overspenders converge to
the value of peer spending in the 90 days after signup, relative to before
signup.

Second, the sensitivity of users’ change in spending based on
whether users spend more or less than their peers is asymmetric
and larger in absolute value for overspenders than for underspenders.
Overspenders reduce their spending on average by $231 per month
and underspenders increase their spending on average by $71 per
month. Third, the distance of users from their peers’ spending is
monotonically related to users’ change in spending—the further an
individual is from the peers’ spending level, the higher the change in
her spending, irrespective of the sign. The slope coefficients associated
with the regression lines in Fig. 1 are −27 for underspenders and −526
for overspenders. These coefficients imply that a standard-deviation
increase in the distance from peers is associated with $27 higher
monthly spending for underspenders. On the other hand, a standard-
deviation increase in the distance from peers is associated with $526
lower monthly spending for overspenders.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038588F. D’Acunto et al.

Note that the average subscriber underspends relative to her peers,
perhaps because app users are more attentive to their own finances
relative to the broader population, as their decision to sign up to Status
Money reveals. We tackle this important external-validity issue in the
RCT we present in Section 8.

The results reported in Fig. 1 consider the change in overall spend-
ing. Intuitively, we would expect that users can adjust their discre-
tionary spending in the short run but not their non-discretionary spend-
ing. The app categorizes expense types (see Fig. A.3 for a few ex-
amples). We report the changes in spending separately for discre-
tionary and non-discretionary categories in Fig. A.6,14 which shows
discretionary spending indeed fully drives the baseline results.

To exclude the possibility that less active users might drive our
results above and beyond the sample selection steps we discussed
above, in Fig. A.7 of the Online Appendix we repeat the raw-data
analysis on various sub-populations that are more and less likely to be
affected by measurement error.15 Specifically, in panels (a) to (c), we
replicate our raw-data facts in the subset of users who link at least two
accounts, users who are 35 years old or younger – and are less likely
to hold many spending and investments accounts – and users whose
income is below $200K, who again might be less likely to hold several
accounts. All our raw data facts are similar within each sub-population.
Finally, in panel (d) of Fig. A.7, we re-estimate our results excluding
users whose spending is above or below the extreme 2.5% of the
distribution of spending in both directions. The patterns we uncover are
similar to the ones we obtain in the full sample, which shows our find-
ings are not driven by the change in behavior of severe outlier/unusual
users.

4.2. Endogenous threshold estimates

Fig. 3 indicates that the app shows users information over and above
their peer group spending, such as the average spending of US con-
sumers or users’ own average monthly inflows. The app also provides
other pieces of information in locations other than the main home-page
picture. One might be concerned that users reacting to information
different from peer spending levels drive the cross-sectional distribution
of spending changes around peers’ spending levels.

To tackle this concern, first we test formally whether peer groups’
spending does represent a threshold around which users react differ-
ently with two complementary methods, which are based on different
assumptions. The first method builds on Hansen (1996, 2000). It esti-
mates a threshold model with unknown threshold. To build intuition,
consider the case of one regressor. The threshold regression estimates
the optimal threshold for a linear model that has different intercept
and slope estimates below and above the threshold. Hansen (1996) also
proposes a test for whether the coefficient estimates below and above
the threshold are statistically different from each other.

Based on this method, we estimate that the location of the threshold
is −0.2 standard deviations away from peers’ spending—a value that
is economically close to zero and for which we cannot reject the
null hypothesis that the threshold is at 0 at any plausible level of
significance. In addition, the regression coefficient estimates below and
above the threshold are statistically different from each other at the
1% level. Panel A of Fig. 4 presents a binned scatterplot of our raw
data in which we set the threshold to the non-parametric estimate
we obtain when implementing this estimation method. None of the
baseline facts we document in the raw data changes when considering

14 Spending is broken down into categories based on classifying the ven-
dors of each transaction. Discretionary spending includes checking-account
withdrawals, entertainment, restaurants, shopping, travel, and fees. Non-
discretionary spending includes groceries, utilities and bills, health and
medical, auto and gas, and education.

15 We thank Byoung-Hyuon Hwang for proposing these tests.

this estimated threshold. These results suggest that a threshold in users’
response to peers’ spending information exists and we cannot reject the
null that this threshold lies exactly at the value of peer spending either
economically or statistically.

For the second method, we follow (Hansen, 2017) and estimate a
regression kink model with unknown threshold. Contrary to the first
method, this model does not allow for different intercepts above and
below the kink. For this reason, this approach is similar to estimating a
linear spline model that has a single endogenously determined node.
Panel B of Fig. 4 presents graphically the results when using this
second method. In this case, the non-parametric estimate for the kink
is 0.22 standard deviations away from peers’ spending. Again, the
estimated kink is close to zero economically and is not different from
zero statistically. The test also reveals that the slope estimates below
and above the kink are statistically different from each other at the 1%
level.

Overall, both methods estimate the value of the threshold to be close
to the level of peer spending, which users see on the app. We interpret
the small absolute values of the two estimates around zero, their lack
of statistical difference from zero, and the opposite signs when using
different assumptions as evidence supporting the conjecture that users
do indeed react to information about the level of peers’ spending
rather than to other information. Below, we implement additional tests
focusing on users for whom different pieces of information predict
reactions of opposite directions, which all suggest that users react to
the information about peer spending rather than to other pieces of
information they observe on the app.

4.3. The dynamic effect of peer information over time

The results so far compare users’ average monthly spending three
months after sign up to three months before sign up based on the
information users observe about their peers’ spending. This analysis
cannot assess the dynamics of the effects and in particular cannot tell us
whether the change in spending is temporary or permanent. Addressing
this question is important to understand the mechanisms that drive
our results as well as for the policy implications. If a temporary drop
in spending by overspenders mainly drove the effects we detect and
users reverted back to pre-signup spending in the medium run, the
effectiveness of providing information about peers on adjusting con-
sumption would be short lived. If, instead, users would consistently
reduce their spending over time to reach the level of spending of their
peers, providing information about peers could be a powerful tool to
moderate overspenders’ behavior.

To tackle this question, we propose a dynamic version of our
baseline regressions in which we use data on monthly spending up to
twelve months after signup. We compute the monthly average change
in spending using the spending up to the 𝑛th month after signup. The
pre-signup spending is instead computed using the average monthly
spending over the three months before signup.

Panel A of Fig. 5, which refers to overspenders, reveals a gradual
cut in spending that builds up over the 12 months after signup: after
12 months, overspenders have cut their spending by $685 per month
on average relative to their spending before signing up. Note that the
average overspender spends $4000 more than her peers at signup.
Hence, over twelve months, overspenders close this spending gap on
average by $685/ $4000=17.1%. The dynamic pattern for overspenders
is consistent with the possibility that these users strive to reduce their
monthly spending gradually and target the level of peers’ monthly
spending, which they learn on the platform.

Panel B of Fig. 5 focuses on underspenders. First of all, note that
because the number of underspenders in our sample is larger than the
number of overspenders the confidence intervals around the estimated
averages are tighter relative to those in Panel A. Moreover, we find that
underspenders also increase their spending gradually over time, but this
change is relatively smaller than the change for overspenders. After 12

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038589F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 4. Distance from peers’ spending and changes in spending after signup—endogenous threshold models.
This figure reports the fitted values of a threshold regression model, with the optimal threshold estimated using the procedure in Hansen (2000) in subfigure (a). Subfigure (b)
reports the fitted values of a kink regression model with the optimal threshold estimated using the procedure in Hansen (2015). In addition to the fitted values, subfigure (b)
reports 90% confidence intervals.

months, underspenders have increased their spending on average by
$198, while their average underspending at signup equals $4400, so
their spending gap closes only by $198/$4400=4.5% on average.

Note that the results in Fig. 5 include different sample sizes for each
month after signup based on the number of users that survives on the
app over time. For example, if we focus on under-spenders and 6-, 9-
, and 12-month horizons, we use, respectively, 82%, 68%, and 57%

of the data we had in our baseline estimates for each of those longer
horizons, which correspond to the accounts that are not canceled over
time. The corresponding percentages for over-spenders are 84%, 68%,
and 58%. Censoring accounts for 16% of the attrition we observe. All
our results are very similar if we repeat the analysis described in Fig. 5
only within the sample of users who survive for at least 12 months
after signup. Moreover, we detect no difference in the reaction to peer

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385810F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 5. Dynamic effect of peer information on spending after sign-up.
This figure plots average monthly changes in spending (and associated 95% confidence intervals) from the first month after sign up until the twelfth month after sign up with
respect to the average monthly spending in the three months before signup. The left panel includes users who spent more than peers before signup, whereas the right panel
includes users who spent less than peers before signup. Note that each monthly average is estimated separately for the subsamples of users who survive each month after signup
and the connected lines do not imply that the estimated associations are continuous over time. We report these results in the form of connected lines rather than discontinuous
point estimates for graphical purposes.

information by users that survive on the app at different horizons in
the months in which they had an account on the app.

These patterns corroborate the static facts we documented above
and in particular that all users converge to peers’ spending level after
learning about it, but overspenders display a larger convergence than
underspenders at a similar distance from peers.

5. Multivariate analysis and alternative explanations

In this section, we assess the robustness of the raw-data facts to
alternative specifications and definitions of the change in spending. We
also tackle a set of potential explanations alternative to users’ reaction
to peer information.

5.1. Variation in spending levels

First, the raw-data results do not account for the fact that a re-
duction in spending of $100 has different implications for users who
have different levels of spending before signup. We thus harmonize the
spending response and make it comparable across users with different
levels of spending pre-signup by considering the ratio of spending over
the 3 months after signup divided by the spending over the 3 months
before signup. To ease the interpretation, we standardize this measure
so that it has a mean equal to 0 and a unit standard deviation.

Table 2 reports the results when using this spending ratio as out-
come variable that controls directly for pre-signup spending levels. The
first two columns compute the average change in spending for those
above peer consumption at signup – the overspenders – and those
below peer consumption at signup, the underspenders, respectively.
Confirming the robustness of the results in Section 4.1 to normaliz-
ing the outcome variable by pre-signup spending levels, we find that
overspenders significantly reduce spending, whereas underspenders
significantly increase it after signing up.

The remaining columns of Table 2 estimate variations of the follow-

ing specification:

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

= 𝛼 + 𝛾 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 + 𝛿 𝒙𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

(1)

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

is the standardized change in spending, 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒
where
𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 is the difference in spending in the one month before signup
between the user and the peer group, 𝒙𝑖
is a vector of regressors
containing the following covariates: a dummy for homeownership, the

log of the user’s credit score, the log of the user’s age, and the log of
the user’s asset and debt balances. Unfortunately, we do not observe all
these covariates jointly for the full sample and hence the sample size is
smaller for the multivariate specifications.

In columns (3) and (4) of Table 2, we find a significant relationship
between distance from peers and the change in spending for both un-
derspenders and overspenders, with a stronger effect for overspenders.
Columns (5) and (6) replicate the analysis after adding the set of demo-
graphic characteristics we observe in the app. For both underspenders
and overspenders, controlling for observable determinants of spending
behavior barely changes the estimates of the regressor of interest either
economically or statistically.

5.2. Robustness and alternative specifications

Based on the day of the month in which users sign up, the graphics
of their comparison with peers differ. In particular, Fig. 3 shows that the
number of days for which users’ daily transactions are compared with
peers’ spending varies. Because we categorize all users as overspenders
or underspenders based on their spending in the 30 days before signup,
for users who sign up early in the month our categorization might in
principle not align with what the users observe on the app. For instance,
a user who faces large expenses early in the month and signs up at
that time might see that she overspends relative to the peers at signup,
even though the cumulative spending over the previous 30 days might
be lower than the average monthly peer spending. In Table A.2 of the
Online Appendix, we show that our results are similar for users who
sign up in the first half or the second half of the month, which alleviates
this concern.

In Table A.3 of the Online Appendix, we further assess the robust-
ness of the results of Table 2 when estimating alternative specifications.
We interact the distance from peers separately for users who lie above
or below their peers in terms of pre-signup spending. This table con-
firms our baseline results both in terms of the significance of the
spending changes and the larger effect for overspenders.

Moreover, in Table A.4 of the Online Appendix, we assess the
robustness of our baseline results to alternative assumptions about
statistical inference. In our baseline results, we estimate Huber–White
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, because the outcome vari-
ables in our specifications are changes in spending for users who sign up
at different points in time and the signup dates are unlikely to coincide
with common shocks across users. For this reason, we do not expect

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385811F. D’Acunto et al.

Table 2
Change in spending after peer spending information.

Above

−0.233∗∗∗
(−42.00)

Below

0.074∗∗∗
(8.34)

Above

Below

Above

Below

Average Change

Distance Peers

Homeownership

log of Credit Score

log of Age

log of Asset Balance

log of Debt Balance

Constant

−0.103∗∗∗
(−11.31)

−0.086∗∗∗
(−7.03)

−0.166∗∗∗
(−20.14)

5012

−0.002
(−0.11)

15,667

−0.104∗∗∗
(−10.47)
0.002
(0.17)
−0.040
(−1.46)
0.014
(0.46)
−0.001
(−0.40)
0.002
(0.55)
0.048
(0.23)

4179

−0.096∗∗∗
(−7.43)
0.062∗∗∗
(2.82)
−0.293∗∗∗
(−3.82)
−0.149∗∗∗
(−2.99)
−0.010∗∗
(−2.17)
−0.011∗∗
(−2.48)
2.543∗∗∗
(4.88)

10,688

Observations

5012

15,667

Columns (1)–(2) of this table report the average change in spending of users three months after signup relative to three
months before based on whether users spent more or less than the average spending of their assigned peer group in the 30
days before signup.
Columns (3)–(6) of this table report the results for estimating the following OLS specification:

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

= 𝛼 + 𝛾 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 + 𝛿 𝒙𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

where

is the ratio of user’s 𝑖 spending three months after signup relative to three months before. 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖
is the difference between user’s 𝑖 spending and the average spending of her peer group in the 30 days before signup. This
difference is standardized to have a unit standard deviation. The vector of individual controls 𝑥𝑖 are the individual-level
observables we have available from the app, which include a homeownership dummy, logarithm of credit score, logarithm of
age, logarithm of asset balance, and logarithm of debt balance. Regression estimates are computed for users with above-peer
spending in columns 1, 3, and 5 and for users with below-peer spending in columns 2, 4, and 6. Numbers in parentheses are
𝑡-statistics based on Huber–White standard errors.

that cross-sectional dimensions might correlate across users and hence
that our estimated standard errors might be downward biased and the
t-statistics upward biased. To assess this argument, in Table A.4, we
cluster the standard errors of our baseline specification across each
of three dimensions that might be relevant for common shocks in our
setting—belonging to the same peer group, living in the same location,
and signing up on the same date. We find that the estimated t-statistics
are similar to those implied by Huber–White standard errors. Statistical
inference is also similar when we estimate standard errors clustered
three ways across all of these dimensions.

5.3. Reaction to information or mean reversion in spending?

Mean-reversion in spending could in principle account for some
of the effects we document in Section 4.1 and especially the larger
effect of peer information on overspenders. Intuitively, a user who buys
an iPhone in the month before signup is likely to spend less in the
following month simply because the extraordinary iPhone expense is
not recurring. To verify that mean reversion does not drive our results,
we add the covariate 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 to Eq. (1), which controls directly
for users’ spending in the month before signup.

Column (1) of Table 3 reports the results of column (3) of Table 2
as a benchmark. Column (2) adds past spending as a control and
column (3) includes past spending and additional user characteristics.
The coefficients on past spending are negative, indicating that spending
does mean revert. However, the coefficient on 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 is still
highly economically and statistically significant. Mean reversion thus
cannot drive our results because, once we control for previous spending
directly, the results are qualitatively unaffected.

Although the coefficients on 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 remain significant,
the inclusion of pre-signup spending as a control has an impact on
the magnitude of the estimates. To ensure that controlling for mean
reversion in alternative ways does not alter our findings, we propose
additional tests in which we use alternative definitions of the distance
from peer spending. In columns (4)-(6) we repeat the estimations of

columns (1)-(3) but we compute the distance with respect to peers
using spending in the second month before signup rather than the
month before signup; columns (7)-(9) repeat the exercise using the
third month before signup. These specifications also rule out directly
that exceptionally large expenses in the month before signup drive our
assignment of users to overspenders and hence that we misattribute
changes in spending over time due to mean reversion to a reaction
to peer information. These alternative ways of controlling for mean
reversion do not alter our results.16

5.4. Information about peers’ spending or other information?

As we discussed in Section 3, the app provides additional informa-
tion to its users beyond the comparison with peers. The comparison
between users’ spending and peer spending is the first, most prominent,
and most salient piece of information users see upon accessing the app
during our sample period. The same picture, however, provides infor-
mation about the average US consumers’ spending, which is computed
as the average spending of the observations used to create all peer
groups, as well as information about the user’s own average monthly
inflows. Moreover, other pages of the app include comparisons between
users’ and peers’ debt, assets, and net worth.

To further corroborate the role of peer spending information, in
addition to the results for the endogenous threshold models we dis-
cussed above, we focus on users who lie above their peers in terms of
spending but below their own average monthly inflows. If these users
reacted to peers’ spending information, we should observe a decline
in spending that is proportional to their distance from peers. To the
contrary, if these users reacted to learning that they spent less than
their monthly inflows they would increase their spending or keep it

16 Fig. A.8 of the Online Appendix shows that also the raw-data facts
discussed above are similar if we compare users with peers based on their
spending well before signup.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385812F. D’Acunto et al.

Table 3
Mean reversion? Assigning users to peer groups based on spending well before signup.

30 days before signup

60 days before signup

90 days before signup

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

−0.103∗∗∗
(−11.31)

−0.044∗∗∗
(−4.25)
−0.070∗∗∗
(−11.72)

Distance Peers

Spend Before

Homeownership

log of Credit Score

log of Age

log of Asset Balance

log of Debt Balance

Constant

Observations

−0.165∗∗∗
(−20.21)
5012

−0.144∗∗∗
(−17.51)
5012

−0.039∗∗∗
(−3.54)
−0.096∗∗∗
(−13.11)
0.037∗∗∗
(2.76)
−0.036
(−1.35)
0.081∗∗∗
(2.62)
0.009∗∗∗
(3.05)
0.007∗∗
(2.36)
−0.328
(−1.62)
4179

−0.110∗∗∗
(−13.83)

−0.082∗∗∗
(−8.99)
−0.035∗∗∗
(−6.09)

−0.187∗∗∗
(−24.95)
4791

−0.175∗∗∗
(−22.66)
4791

−0.083∗∗∗
(−8.61)
−0.062∗∗∗
(−8.91)
0.035∗∗∗
(2.80)
−0.042
(−1.59)
0.075∗∗∗
(2.63)
0.012∗∗∗
(3.97)
0.008∗∗∗
(2.92)
−0.319
(−1.62)
3970

−0.099∗∗∗
(−11.75)

−0.077∗∗∗
(−8.05)
−0.029∗∗∗
(−5.08)

−0.209∗∗∗
(−27.18)
4473

−0.198∗∗∗
(−24.88)
4473

−0.075∗∗∗
(−7.38)
−0.058∗∗∗
(−8.25)
0.034∗∗∗
(2.68)
−0.078∗∗
(−2.18)
0.090∗∗∗
(3.01)
0.012∗∗∗
(3.92)
0.007∗∗∗
(2.68)
−0.161
(−0.64)
3697

This table reports results for estimating the following OLS specification:

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

= 𝛼 + 𝛾 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 + 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒 + 𝛿 𝒙𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

where

is the ratio of user’s 𝑖 spending three months after signup relative to three months before. 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 is the difference between user’s 𝑖
spending and the average spending of her peer group. Listed on top of each column is the period used to compute user’s distance from peers’ spending and
hence whether they are categorized as overspenders or underspenders. We alternatively use the month before signup (as in the baseline results in Table 2), two
months before signup, or three months before signup. In all columns, this difference is standardized to have a unit standard deviation. The vector of individual
controls 𝑥𝑖 are the individual-level observables we have available from the app, which include a homeownership dummy, logarithm of credit score, logarithm of
age, logarithm of asset balance, and logarithm of debt balance. Numbers in parentheses are 𝑡-statistics based on Huber–White standard errors.

unchanged. Columns (1)-(2) of Table A.5 in the Online Appendix show
that users cut their spending if they are overspenders relative to their
peers even if they spent less than their monthly inflows.

We then focus on overspenders relative to peers who learn that
they spent less than the average US population. In this case, if users
were reacting to information about the average US consumer, their
spending should increase or stay the same, rather than decrease, after
signup. Columns (3)-(4) of Table A.5 show that such users decrease
their spending.

In the remaining columns of Table A.5, we assess whether other
comparisons users can observe on the app – the level of their debt and
net worth relative to peers – drive their change in spending. We define
distance from peers debt and net worth in an equivalent way to how
we measure distance from peers’ spending. In both cases, we find that,
once we control for users’ distance from peers’ spending, their distance
from peers’ debt or peers’ net worth has no explanatory power for users’
change in spending.

6. Assessing causality: Quasi-exogenous matching to peer groups

The results so far cannot rule out a few endogeneity concerns. For
instance, the endogenous timing of signup might be correlated with
users’ intentions to change their spending behavior irrespective of peer
information. Signing up might be a way to track expenses more easily.
In this case, overspenders might have cut their spending irrespective
of whether the app compared them to their peers. Another potential
concern, which we have already discussed, is that mean reversion in
spending drives our results. Although we proposed direct tests to tackle
the issue, one might still be concerned.

To address these concerns, ideally we would compare the reaction
of users who have similar characteristics and spend similar amounts
before signup, but observe different information about peers at signup.
Our setting allows for this type of test. We exploit the fact that the app
engages in bucketing to assign users to peer groups. In this way, users
that are observationally similar but happen to lie just within or just
outside a peer-group bucket will be matched to different peer groups
and hence observe different information about peers’ spending.

In particular, we consider income bucketing, because we observe
income as a continuous variable and income is monotonically related
to spending, whereas the association of other continuous dimensions
such as age with spending is non-monotonic. Status Money matches
users with peer groups based on whether users fall above or below a
set of income thresholds of which users are not aware of at signup. The
income thresholds are $35K, $50K, $75K, $100K, and $150K. Because
income is a continuous variable, small differences in income relate to
otherwise similar consumers, as we document below. And, yet, the
spending of similar users who are matched to different peer groups
reacts differently after sign up relative to before.

For example, consider a user who reports an annual income of $99K
and one who reports an annual income of $101K. We can test directly
that these users are not distinguishable along the set of characteristics
we observe, which include demographics and the spending behavior in
the months before signup.

Whereas users around the income values are similar, the peer groups
to which they are matched, and hence the information about peers’
spending they observe, can be substantially different. Due to bucketing,
in our example a user who reports an income of $99K receives infor-
mation about the average spending of peers whose income is between
$75K and $99K, whereas a similar user who reports an income of $101K
receives information about the average spending of peers whose income
is between $100K and $149K. The user matched to the lower peer
group will thus be more likely to be classified as an overspender relative
to her peers, whereas the similar user matched to the higher peer group
will be more likely to be classified as an underspender.

To implement our identification test, we need to restrict the sample
to users who are close enough to each income threshold so that they
do not differ based on observables. Moreover, we need to have a large
enough number of users both below and above each threshold. Because
some users tend to report rounded values of annual income, the mass of
users just above each income value (which includes the value) is higher
than the mass of users just below. In our identification sample, we thus
include users with an income up to $6K below each income value and
users with an income up to $2K above the value to guarantee samples
of similar sizes above and below each value. We show that our results

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385813F. D’Acunto et al.

Table 4
IV sample: Balancing of observables around peer assignment income rules.

Above Dummy

Observations

Above Dummy

Observations

Above Dummy

Observations

Above Dummy

Observations

Above Dummy

Observations

Home
ownership

Log of
credit score

Panel A: Income Threshold: $35,000

0.031
(1.06)
896

−0.009
(−0.95)
834

Panel B: Income Threshold: $50,000

0.038
(1.63)

−0.001
(−0.09)

1516
Panel C: Income Threshold: $75,000

1410

0.013
(0.49)
1546

0.002
(0.25)
1435

Panel D: Income Threshold: $100,000

0.004
(0.14)
1128

0.019
(1.24)
1047

Panel E: Income Threshold: $150,000

−0.015
(−0.35)
543

0.002
(0.24)
510

Log of
age

0.018
(1.02)
896

0.014
(1.31)

1516

0.012
(1.09)
1546

0.024∗∗
(2.09)
1128

−0.000
(−0.00)
543

Log of Asset
balance

Log of Debt
balance

−0.160
(−0.85)
675

0.021
(0.17)

1227

0.017
(0.14)
1278

0.199
(1.62)
954

−0.074
(−0.44)
482

0.324∗∗
(2.10)
837

0.009
(0.08)

1415

0.027
(0.23)
1457

−0.163
(−1.21)
1065

−0.322
(−1.54)
516

This table reports results of regressing all demographics we use as controls in our baseline analysis on a dummy that equals one for users at or
above the income values that Status Money uses to define peer groups—$35K, $50K, $65K, $75K, $100K, and $150K and 0 otherwise. Numbers
in parentheses are 𝑡-statistics based on Huber–White standard errors.

do not change if we use symmetric bandwidths around income values,
which though imply samples of different sizes for underspenders and
overspenders.

We exploit the quasi-random assignment of users to peer groups
based on these pre-defined income bucketing rules for an instrumental-
variable identification strategy. Note that we cannot implement a re-
gression discontinuity design in this setting because peer groups are
determined based on six different observable characteristics at the
individual level and not just based on income. For dimensions other
than income, we do not have a clearcut prediction about whether
average peer spending should be higher or lower at either side of the
bucketing threshold.

6.1. Balancing of observables across income bucketing levels

Before proceeding with the analysis, we verify that we cannot
reject the null hypothesis that users who end up just below and just
above the income bucketing values differ on observables. We start by
providing graphical evidence in Fig. 6. For each income value, we plot
the estimated average monthly spending and confidence intervals for
the three months before signup (in thousands $) for users around the
income values at intervals of $500 of annual income.17 For each income
level, we cannot reject the null that users above and below spent the
same amounts before signup. The highest threshold ($150K) is the one
for which average pre-spending is more varied across income levels,
largely because of the smaller sample, but even for this threshold we
do not detect systematic economic or statistical patterns.

We also assess the balancing of the observable characteristics that
entered our baseline analysis in Table 4. For each variable and each
income bucketing level, we report the results of regressing the variable
on a dummy that equals 1 if the user is above the threshold and 0
otherwise. Each panel of Table 4 refers to one of the income buckets.
Overall, we fail to detect any economically or statistically significant
patterns. Although for two individual coefficients we reject the null,
the vast majority of estimated coefficients is not different from zero

17 Confidence intervals are based on one third of a standard deviation above

and below the average.

Table 5
Instrumental-Variable (IV) analysis: Peer spending information and change in spending.

First
stage

0.743∗∗∗
(24.62)

0.344∗∗∗
(23.33)

606.1

5629

Second
stage

0.111∗∗∗
(3.08)

−0.305∗∗∗
(−15.63)

5629

Placebo IV
first
stage

0.078
(0.795)

0.120∗∗∗
(3.46)

0.63

678

Second
stage

0.942
(0.432)

−0.566∗∗∗
(−2.02)

678

Above Dummy

Peer Spending

Spending Before

First stage F-stat

Observations

Columns (1)–(2) of this table report the results for implementing our instrumental-
variable strategy that compares users just below and users at or above the income
values that Status Money uses to define peer groups—$35K, $50K, $65K, $75K, $100K,
and $150K. Columns (3)–(4) refer to our placebo analysis in which we compare users
just below and users at or above a set of income values that Status Money does not use
to define peer groups—$45K, $60K, $90K, $110K, and $140K. For each income value,
the sample includes users whose income is at most $6K below the value and at most
$2K above the value.
In all columns, we estimate a set of two-stage least-square specifications in which the
uncertainty in the estimate of first-stage coefficients is taken into account directly. The
first stage consists of the following specification:

𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝐴𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖 + 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

where 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 is the peer-spending value for user 𝑖 and 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝐴𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖 is a
dummy variable for whether the income is at or above the threshold value. The second
stage specification, which is estimated jointly with the first stage, uses the instrumented
𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 of the first stage as the main covariate in the following specification:
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

+ 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

= 𝛼 + 𝛽 Peer_Spending_i

⋀

where

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

is the ratio of post and pre consumption in the three months around

signup. All other variables are the same as in the first stage. Numbers in parentheses
are 𝑡-statistics based on Huber–White standard errors.

economically or statistically. Crucially, even for the coefficients that
appear significant, we detect no systematic patterns in terms of signs.
Overall, the observables appear balanced above and below each income
level.

To further support the exclusion restriction we need to assume to
interpret our IV results causally, in Fig. 7 we show that demographic

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385814F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 6. Average monthly spending over the three months before sign-up around income thresholds.
This figure reports the average users’ monthly spending before signup to Status Money when sorting users by their reported income levels (x-axis). In each panel, income levels
are reported at incremental intervals of $500. Each panel reports average spending pre-signup for users around the thresholds in our instrumental-variable analysis. Our strategy
assumes that the levels of pre-spending are similar for users above and below each threshold, and hence we should fail to reject the null hypothesis of no differences in average
spending across contiguous groups of income. To be conservative, we report tight confidence bandwidths of one third of a standard deviation above and below the point estimate.

characteristics such as age, credit score, log of asset balance and log

6.2. IV results

of debt balance are similar above and below the income bucketing
levels.18 This evidence dismisses the potential concern that some users
manipulate their position relative to their peers and supports the as-

sumption that the assignment to one or the other peer groups is

quasi-exogenous in this identification sample.

18 Fig. 7 focuses on the $50K income value to avoid reporting many panels,

but the results are similar for all the other income values.

Armed with our identification sample, we use the dummy for
whether users are above the income thresholds that place them in
different peer-group buckets as an instrument for the peer spending
such users see after signup. A user at or just above the income threshold
is assigned to a peer group whose income is, on average, higher,
because the user is at the bottom of the peer distribution based on
income. The user will thus be more likely to observe peer spending
that is higher than her own spending. The opposite is true for users
just below the income threshold, who are assigned to a peer-group
bucket for which they are at the top of the peer distribution by income.
These users are more likely to be classified as overspenders with respect

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385815F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 7. Observable characteristics of users around the $50K income threshold.
This figure reports the distribution of age, credit score, the log of asset balance and the log of debt balance around the $50,000 income threshold.

to their peers, relative to users above the thresholds. We can test for
the relevance of our instrument in the first stage of our two-stage
least-squares model:

are assigned to a different peer group—about three quarters of a
standard deviation higher. The first-stage F statistics is 606, which
limits concerns of a weak instrument.

𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝐴𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖 + 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

(2)

where 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 is the peer spending user 𝑖 sees at signup, and
𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝐴𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖 is a dummy variable that equals one for users’ with
incomes at or just above the threshold. Based on the design, we predict
that ̂𝛽 > 0—users at or above the threshold will be matched to a peer
group whose spending is higher, on average, relative to those below
the threshold.

Note that the endogenous variable we instrument in this design is
peer spending rather than the dummy variable for whether users are
overspenders relative to their peers, because instrumenting the dummy
would create a forbidden regression problem whereby the assumption
on the linearity of the conditional expectations function of the 2SLS
design does not hold. This problem does not arise when instrumenting
a continuous variable such as the level of peer spending.

The second stage uses the instrumented 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 in Eq. (2)

as the main covariate in the following specification:

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

⋀

= 𝛼 + 𝛾 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖

+ 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

(3)

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

where
three months around signup.

is the ratio of post- to pre-signup spending in the

The second-stage estimates are reported in column (2). Even in
the second stage, our hypothesis is that ̂𝛾 > 0—the higher the peers’
spending, the more likely the user is an underspender and the less likely
she is to cut her spending. Conversely, the lower the peers’ spending,
the more likely she is to be an overspender and the more likely she is
to cut her spending.

In terms of economic magnitudes, note that the variable 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 is standardized and the sample standard deviation is $3100.
Therefore, our estimate in column (2) implies that users who are
assigned to peers whose spending is $3100 lower than other peer
groups cut their spending by about 11% more of their pre-sign up
spending relative to other users.

As discussed above, our IV analysis uses asymmetric bandwidths
around the income bucketing levels to allow for a similar number of
observations both above and below the levels. This choice is not rele-
vant as long as the instrument is valid in the identification sample, but
to further dismiss any concerns, in Table A.6 of the Online Appendix we
show that the IV results do not change qualitatively or quantitatively
when we use symmetric bandwidths to select the observations in the
identification sample and hence samples that are not balanced in terms
of the number of observations around the income bucketing levels.

6.3. Placebo IV analysis

We first verify the relevance of our instrument by assessing the
results from the first-stage regressions in column (1) of Table 5. Con-
sistent with the app’s assignment rule, users just above each income
level do observe a higher peer spending relative to users below, who

To corroborate our interpretation of the IV analysis and the exclu-
sion restriction we assume for a causal interpretation, we propose a
placebo test. We set alternative placebo income bucketing thresholds

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385816F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 8. Bunching of users’ reported income at the IV and placebo IV thresholds.
This figure plots the distribution of income levels reported by users in the IV sample to observe the bunching patterns at round values and especially at the IV and placebo IV
thresholds. The IV thresholds are $35K, $50K, $75K, $100K, and $150K. The placebo IV thresholds are $45K, $60K, $90K, $110K, and $140K.

different from the true thresholds that Status Money uses to assign users
to peer groups but including a similar-sized mass of users.

To determine the placebo levels, we use three criteria. First, we
ensure that none of the users in the IV sample also enters the placebo
IV sample; that is, we guarantee no overlap across the income values
of the two IV analyses. This criterion ensures that none of the results
might be driven by users’ reaction to the actual assignment to different
peer groups. Second, we ensure the placebo income levels are set at
round dollar values like the true levels. This criterion allows us to rule
out that our IV results might be related to systematic differences of
the behavior of reported-income rounders and non-rounders. Third, we
ensure that the placebo IV sample is large enough to dismiss that the
lack of statistical power can be responsible for any non-results in this
sample.

These three criteria lead us to select the following values as placebo
income thresholds: $45K, $60K, $90K, $110K, and $140K. We construct
the placebo IV sample exactly as we did in the IV analysis, and we
estimate Eqs. (2) and (3) for this placebo sample. Of course, our
predictions about the coefficients are now different: In Eq. (2), the first
stage, we expect that ̂𝛽 is not economically or statistically different from
zero—being above or below the placebo value should not predict the
dollar amount of peer spending, because users above and below the
peer cutoff are not systematically assigned to different peer groups.
In terms of second stage, estimating it when the first stage shows
the placebo instrument is not relevant is meaningless. If we were still
proceeding with the estimation, we would expect that ̂𝛾 ‘‘blows up;’’
that is, it becomes large in any direction and statistically insignificant,
because the variation we use to instrument for the endogenous variable
is unrelated to the actual variation in the data. Columns (3)-(4) of
Table 5 show that the first stage of this placebo IV analysis does not
go through and consistently the second stage blows up.

The placebo IV analysis also dismisses that users who bunch at
rounded income values might behave differently from others. This phe-
nomenon would be worrisome if the unobservables that make certain
users provide rounded values of annual income also predict system-
atically different reactions to peers’ information. Fig. 8 shows that
bunching at rounded values holds for both the actual bucketing income
thresholds and the placebo thresholds. If anything, the largest mass of

respondents bunches at one of the placebo thresholds we use—$60K.
Despite the commonality of bunching across all rounded values, our
placebo IV analysis finds no effect of being at the (rounded) values
relative to below, which dismisses the concern.

7. Informativeness and spending behavior

As we discussed in Section 2, another unique feature of our setting
is the heterogeneity in the informativeness of peer groups, whose
average characteristics are more or less tightly defined around users’
own characteristics. We can test whether users who are assigned to
more similar, and hence informative, peer groups react more to peer
information relative to others.

On top of providing another test for the information channel, this
analysis allows us to separate the role of information about peer spend-
ing from the role of any other design features overspenders might see
on the app, such as colors, bars, or text (e.g. see Bazley et al. (2021)),
because these features are the same for all overspenders irrespective of
the informativeness of their peer groups.

7.1. Tightness of peer-group characteristics

Our first proxy for informativeness exploits the fact that Status
Money imposes a minimum number of 5000 underlying observations
when constructing each peer group to make peer-group averages mean-
ingful. Based on this rule, the ranges of peers’ characteristics are tighter
or wider based on how many observations similar to the user exist in
the external representative data used to construct peer groups.

For instance, suppose two users have the same characteristics under
all dimensions except their location, which might be Manhattan, NY,
for user A and Helena, MT, for user B. Whereas the app might easily
find 5000 observations in Manhattan with the characteristics of user
A, it is likely to miss the same number of observations for Helena,
MT. For user B, then, the app would enlarge the geographic area
of peer comparison to the overall state of Montana, and if enough
observations were still not available, to the overall US. Users know
the characteristics of the peer group, and hence user A knows she is
compared with similar peers living in her same location, whereas user

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385817F. D’Acunto et al.

Table 6
Effects by informativeness of peer groups.

Similarity to peers

Number of peers

Peer group income width

Had peer info before

Peer Spending × High

Peer Spending

log of Income × High

log of Income

High

Spending Before

First stage F-stat
Observations

0.123∗∗
(1.97)
0.060
(1.37)

0.035
(1.30)
−0.307∗∗∗
(−15.71)
312.8
5629

0.181∗
(1.71)
0.051
(0.66)
−0.296
(–1.57)
0.001
(0.01)
3.332
(1.59)
−0.286∗∗∗
(−18.88)
149.9
5629

0.143
(1.56)
0.040
(0.64)

0.051
(1.38)
−0.308∗∗∗
(−11.22)
106.7
2600

0.378∗∗
(2.03)
−0.035
(−0.33)
−0.712∗∗
(2.34)
0.257
(1.50)
7.920∗∗
(2.34)
−0.290∗∗∗
(−13.74)
43.42
2600

−0.371∗∗
(−2.36)
0.386∗∗
(2.56)

−0.191∗
(−1.76)
−0.282∗∗∗
(−15.16)
94.66
4552

−0.460∗∗∗
(−2.59)
0.492∗∗∗
(2.83)
0.422∗∗
(2.07)
−0.195
(−1.58)
−4.957∗∗
(−2.15)
−0.296∗∗∗
(−16.50)
73.29
4552

−0.268∗∗
(−2.54)
0.360∗∗∗
(3.56)

−0.290∗∗∗
(−5.78)
−0.300∗∗∗
(−12.95)
207.8
3613

−0.537∗∗∗
(−2.84)
0.615∗∗∗
(3.51)
0.808∗∗∗
(2.87)
−0.796∗∗∗
(−3.22)
−9.272∗∗∗
(−2.94)
−0.272∗∗∗
(−14.74)
118.5
3613

This table reports the results for a set of two-stage-least-squares specifications that compares users just below and users at or above the income values that Status Money uses to
define peer groups, that is, $35K, $50K, $65K, $75K, $100K, and $150K. For each value, the sample includes users whose income is at most $6K below the value and at most
$2K above the value. The first stage consists of the following two specifications:

𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝐴𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖 + 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖;

𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ = 𝛼 + 𝛽 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝐴𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ + 𝛾𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ + 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

where 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 is the peer-spending value for user 𝑖; 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝐴𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖 is a dummy variable for whether the income is at or above the income value; 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ is a dummy variable
whose definition changes across columns: in Similarity to Peers, High equals 1 if users are matched to the tightest possible peer group characteristics for all categories, and zero if
they are matched to wider peers groups for at least one category; in Number of Peers, High equals one if users are matched to peer groups in the top quarter of the distribution by
size (higher or equal to 21K peers), and zero if they are matched to peer groups in the bottom quarter (lower or equal to 6K, with 5K being the minimum size of peer groups);
in Peer Group Income Width, High equals 1 if users are matched to peer groups whose range of income is $50K or above, and zero if the range is $15K or below; in Had Peer Info
Before, High equals 1 if users reside in urban locations – our proxy for being exposed to dense information about similar demographics – and zero if they reside in rural locations.
𝑋𝑖 is a set of individual-level observables that include the logarithm of users’ income, the same variable interacted with High, and users’ spending in the month before signup.
The second stage specification, which is estimated jointly with the first stage, uses the instrumented 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 and 𝑃 𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ of the first stage as the main
covariates in the following specification:
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

+ 𝛾 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ + 𝜁 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐵𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖,

= 𝛼 + 𝛽1 Peer_Spending_i×High

+ 𝛽2 Peer_Spending_i

⋀

⋀

where

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑝𝑟𝑒

is the ratio of post and pre consumption in the three months around signup and all other variables are the same as in the first stage. We report the second-stage

estimates for different sample splits. Numbers in parentheses are 𝑡-statistics based on Huber–White standard errors.

B knows she is compared with peers who are similar along all the
characteristics except for their location. Intuitively, then, if users attach
any information value to the peer signal, user A should believe that the
signal she gets is informative, whereas user B might not.

Based on this intuition, we add an interaction term between peer-
group spending and a dummy that equals one for users whose char-
acteristics are all matched to the closest possible range and zero for
users for whom at least one characteristic is matched to a broader
range (less informative). We then estimate the two-stage least-squares
specification in Eqs. (2) and (3) and report the second-stage estimates in
column (1) of Table 6. In line with our conjecture, users for whom the
peer spending signal is more precise drive the spending reaction. The
difference in the change in spending after signup is about three times
larger for users who observe precise peer groups, and the difference is
not statistically different from zero for other users.

In column (2) of Table 6, as in all the even columns of the table, we
repeat the analysis after controlling directly for users’ income and the
interaction of users’ income with the informativeness of peer groups.
This analysis aims to address the concern that the variables we use
to proxy for the informativeness of peer groups might at the same
time capture systematic differences in users’ income. This concern is
compelling, because users whose income is in the right tail of the
distribution are by construction more likely to be matched with an
imprecise peer group relative to users with lower levels of income.
At the same time, we find that high-income users react less to peer
information relative to low-income users, as we show in panel (a)
of Fig. A.9 in the Online Appendix.19 Controlling for income and its
interaction with the peer-group-similarity dummy does not change our
results in terms of the effect of informativeness on spending reaction.

19 In Fig. A.9, we show that we do not detect systematic differences in
reactions across other demographic characteristics of users, such as age or
credit scores.

7.2. Size of peer groups

Our second proxy for informativeness is the size of peer groups. The
number of peers in the group to which users are assigned is displayed
in a salient fashion to users in the top-right corner of the peer group
figure, as we show in Fig. 2. The larger is the sample size of the peer
group whose average spending is computed, the less noisy and more
informative is the estimated sample mean. One might worry that, if
users lack statistical literacy, they might ignore that a sample average
estimated on a larger sample is likely to be closer to the true population
parameter than a sample average estimated on a smaller sample. But
due to the principle of the ‘‘wisdom of the crowd’’, at a very minimum
users should think that a behavior in which a large number of agents
engages in is more likely to be common than a behavior in which only
a small number of agents engages in.

In columns (3) and (4) of Table 6, we interact peer spending with a
dummy variable that equals one if users are matched to peer groups in
the top quarter of the distribution by size (larger or equal to 21K peers),
and zero if they are matched to peer groups in the bottom quarter
(lower or equal to 6K, with 5K being the minimum size of peer groups).
Consistent with a stronger reaction for more informative peer groups,
the effect is about twice as large for users assigned to a larger peer
group. We also reject the null that the effect is zero in the specification
that includes controls for income in column (4).

7.3. Peer-group income-range width

Third, we consider the fact that the peer categories users observe
have different ranges of values. For example, consider income. Because
the income distribution in the population is far from uniform – the mass
of individuals with middle income levels is substantially larger than the
mass of individuals with high levels of income – in a representative
sample, obtaining a large mass of peers for tight ranges of income
values among mid-income earners is relatively easy, whereas ranges

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385818F. D’Acunto et al.

need to be wider at higher income levels to ensure a similarly large
number of peers.

For this reason, the thresholds of income we use in the IV analysis
imply tighter and wider peer groups. For instance, a user who earns
$42K a year will be assigned to a peer groups whose range of income
is between $35K and $49K, which is relatively tight. Instead, a user
who earns about $300K will be assigned to a peer group including
individuals who earn more than $150K, which is a substantially wider
group. For such a broad group, average peer spending might not be
informative.

In columns (5) and (6) of Table 6, we interact the peer group
spending with a dummy variable that equals 1 for users who are
matched to a peer group whose income width is $50K or above, and
zero if the range is $15K or below. Users for whom the peer group
is more narrowly defined display an economically large reaction. By
contrast, the estimated effect for users who are assigned to wider peer
groups is close to zero economically and statistically. Note that these
tests keep constant users’ income and hence we only capture the effect
of the width of peer groups.

7.4. Direct access to peer information before signup

Another dimension along which the signal about peer spending
might be more or less informative is the extent to which users could
have been exposed to information about their peers’ actual overall
spending before signing up. To obtain variation, we use users’ location
as a proxy for the density of information. Specifically, we conjecture
that users who live in less crowded and dense areas might have fewer
peers, that is, people who look similar to them among most charac-
teristics, while both types of users might access similarly biased views
on spending through social media. Instead, users who reside in highly
dense urban locations are exposed to more peers in their daily lives and
hence to a higher density of information about peers before signup.
Table A.7 in the Online Appendix reports examples of locations that
are categorized as urban or rural. Urban locations include the largest
metropolitan conglomerates in the US. The rural group includes smaller
cities and towns, such as Tucson (AZ), Charlottesville (VA), and Chapel
Hill (NC).

Based on our conjecture, users from less dense towns should react
more than urban users, which is what we document in columns (7) and
(8) of Table 6.20 We find large and significant effects of peer spending
on users in rural areas, whereas the effect for users in urban areas is
close to zero.

Although the test based on urban–rural locations can be interpreted
as our conjecture suggests, we acknowledge that living in urban or rural
environments might be correlated with many unobserved characteris-
tics of users and hence this fourth test is a less precise test for the role of
peer signal informativeness compared to the others we discussed above.

8. External validity: Randomized control trial

Due to the setting, our results so far cannot speak to two important
issues. The first is external validity. All our results are based on a
sample of users who self-select into the app. Even though our IV design
supports the causality of peer-group information on spending changes,
this effect might be peculiar to users of the app and might not hold in
the general population, because app users in our setting cared enough
for obtaining information about their peers that they decided to sign

20 Note the urban and rural subsamples do not sum up to the full identifica-
tion sample. This discrepancy arises because the app allows for a third location
category labeled ‘‘suburban’’. This category includes locations that are at times
highly urbanized, such as the suburbs of large metropolises, or quite rural. For
this reason, we exclude this group from the split analysis. When we look at
this group separately, we find an effect similar in size to the effect for the
urban subsample.

up. Other parts of the general population might not be interested in
peer information, and providing them with peer information might not
change their spending behavior. Moreover, like in all other income
aggregators studied in the literature,21 the app is only meaningful to
users if they provide sensitive information. One might wonder whether
individuals who are willing to provide such sensitive information might
also be more likely to react to peer information than the general
population, which would cast doubt on the external validity of our
results.

The second issue we face is that Status Money does not elicit some
demographics that earlier research shows are important to determine
spending behavior (D’Acunto et al., 2022,?). For instance, we do not
observe users’ gender, their education levels, their marital status, or
whether they have children. We have no compelling reasons to think
that any of these unobservables might vary systematically around the
thresholds of our IV analysis, even though we cannot test this claim.
The main reason why we are concerned about unobserved charac-
teristics is not that the baseline results could be explained by them,
but that the baseline effects might be higher or lower across different
demographics—unobserved characteristics might interact with peer
information to determine heterogeneous effects.

The ideal test to address these issues would be an RCT in which we
randomly provide a representative sample of the general population
with the app, and we test the effect of providing peer information on
the change in the spending of these agents. Unfortunately, we cannot
run this ideal test, because, by construction, we need users to give us
their account information and we cannot force members of the general
population to do so.

To get as close as possible to the ideal test, we designed the follow-
ing RCT. We recruited a representative US population through an online
platform, Amazon Mechanical Turk (mTurk), which is increasingly used
for experimental research in the US and abroad.22 Fig. A.10 of the
Online Appendix plots the geographic distribution of the respondents,
who are distributed across the whole US. We invited respondents to
answer a survey without any references to peer information, peers, or
household finances. In this way, none of the respondents we recruited
could have decided to participate because they were interested in
information about their peers or in their own finances, which is the
main concern of our baseline analysis in terms of external validity.

We report the survey questions in the Online Appendix. We followed
the work of Attanasio and Weber (1995) and subsequent literature (Jap-
pelli and Pistaferri, 2010) to elicit respondents’ marginal propensity
to consume (MPC) before and after receiving truthful information
about the MPC of representative individuals with similar income levels
(income peers).

After eliciting users’ MPC, we provide them with truthful informa-
tion about the MPC of US consumers that are similar to them in terms
of income (income peers). Theoretically and empirically, income is a
strong predictor of MPCs (Coibion et al. (2020b). We call participants
with a MPC higher than their income peers overspenders and others
underspenders. Finally, we elicit survey participants’ MPCs again after
observing their income peers’ MPCs.

The RCT mimics our baseline field setting by providing peer spend-
ing information, comparing it to respondents’ own MPC, and assessing
any changes in respondents’ reported spending behavior. The RCT has
the advantage of keeping constant dimensions that we cannot observe
in the baseline field analysis.

The RCT faces the potential issue of demand effects: respondents
might infer the hypotheses we want to test and, in a setting in which

21 For

instance,

see Gelman, Kariv, Shapiro, Silverman, and Tadelis
(2014), Gelman, Kariv, Shapiro, Silverman, and Tadelis (2018), Olafsson and
Pagel (2018), Hau, Huang, Shan, and Sheng (2019).

22 For instance, see Kuziemko et al. (2015), DellaVigna and Pope (2017), Ba-
zley, Cronqvist, and Mormann (2021), Lian, Ma, and Wang (2019), D’acunto,
Hoang, Paloviita, and Weber (2023), D’Acunto (2018, 2019).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385819F. D’Acunto et al.

Fig. 9. Change in reported MPC after randomized peer information.
This figure shows binned scatterplots of changes in reported marginal propensity to consume (MPC) elicited before and after provision of the MPC of income peers for both the
time at which the randomized control trial was run (during the COVID-19 crisis) and in normal times. Information about income peers’ MPC is based on a representative US
sample. In both subfigures, the 𝑥-axis measures the difference in MPC with respect to peers. The 𝑦-axis reports results for changes in reported MPC. Each binned scatterplot divides
the 1015 respondents into 50 groups. In addition to the scatterplot, we report in red the fitted values of a threshold regression that estimates different linear regression coefficients
below and above the zero threshold.

stakes are no as high as in the field, might conform to our hypothe-
sis. De Quidt et al. (2018) show that the scope for demand effects is
minimal in settings like ours. Moreover, we document below asymmet-
ric responses in the survey as we see in the field setting, which directly
rules out demand effects or anchoring as drivers of our RCT findings.
To further reduce the concern of demand effects, we told respondents
explicitly on two occasions that there were no right or wrong answers
and that all answers would be of extreme interest to us as long as they
reflected the respondents’ true opinions.

The survey consisted of three parts. In the first part, we elicited
respondents’ age and income groups. We proposed three income buck-
ets based on the values of income groups for which (Parker and
Souleles, 2019) report the marginal propensity to spend an unexpected
reimbursement.

In the second part of the survey, subjects read information about
their income peers’ average MPC. We then elicited subjects’ MPC fol-
lowing (Jappelli and Pistaferri, 2014) both before and after delivering
peer information. Moreover, because the survey was run during the
COVID-19 pandemic, we asked respondents to provide their MPC based
on their situation at the time of the survey as well as before the
COVID-19 pandemic started. The treatment’s size depends on subject’s
income group as well as on their reported MPC before the information
provision.

In the third part of the survey, we elicited a set of demograph-
ics such as gender, marital status, number of children, and political
leanings, as well as economic preferences and beliefs—risk aversion,
patience, financial literacy, and generalized trust.

8.1. Effect of peer information on a non-selected population

Armed with this RCT, we can first assess if this non-selected draw
of the US population responds to the provision of peer information
about spending in a similar manner as Status Money users. In Fig. 9, we
plot the changes in reported MPCs for the whole sample after sorting
respondents based on the distance of their MPC from income peers’
MPC. In Table 7, we report the average change in reported MPC before
and after the provision of income peers’ information, for both MPCs
in normal times and MPCs during the COVID-19 pandemic. In both
cases, respondents converge to income peers’ behavior and the effect
is stronger for respondents whose MPC was higher than their income
peers’ and for respondents who were further away from their income
peers before the information provision.

We then ask if the spending response to peer information varies
by demographic groups, some of which might be overrepresented on
Status Money. Reassuringly, in Table 8 we find that the reactions are
economically and statistically significant for each subsample of RCT re-
spondents split across demographics that are important determinants of
spending behavior, such as gender, marital status, number of children,
and individuals who are more or less risk averse.

Finally, we can use our RCT to assess the average overall effect of
the intervention – providing consumers with information about their
income peers’ MPC – on the population. Because consumers who are
especially concerned about their finances or especially sensitive to
peers’ choices might select into Status Money, we cannot extrapolate the
baseline analysis results to make claims about the general population.
The drawback from inferring population-level effects from our RCT
is that the MPC is self-reported and not based on actual spending
data. We assess spending plans rather than actual amounts spent. Note,
though, that economic research based on which we design our MPC
elicitation questions finds that elicited MPCs in surveys map closely into
average MPCs observed in actual consumption data (e.g., see Parker
and Souleles (2019); Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014); D’Acunto et al.
(2022)).

The average reported MPC in normal times before any information
about peers in our survey sample is 45.6%, and declines to 44.7% after
respondents observe peer information. Overall, providing the whole
population with information about peers reduces the average MPC
by 0.9 percentage points, which is about 2% of the pre-information
average MPC. This effect is, on average, negative, because we detect
an asymmetric effect of peer information based on whether respon-
dents are above or below the peers: Those who have higher MPCs
than their income peers react disproportionally more to the infor-
mation than those who have lower MPCs than their income peers.
This asymmetry suggests that, when peer information is provided to
a population who did not select into observing such information, this
information has a moderating effect, on average, in terms of spending
plans. A moderating effect of peer information has also been de-
tected for expert decision-makers such as the CEOs of listed companies
(e.g., see D’Acunto, Weber, and Xie (2019c)).

For respondents who accessed the RCT with a higher MPC than
their peers, the average MPC was 66.6% and declined to 62.9% after
observing peer information, which is a drop of 3.7 percentage points,
or 5.6% of the pre-information average MPC.

Interestingly, respondents’ MPCs are lower in times of crisis than
in normal times, which seems at odds with the standard life-cycle

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385820F. D’Acunto et al.

Table 7
External validity 1: Peer MPC information and change in MPC.

Current times (COVID-19)

Normal times

Above

−3.854∗∗∗
(−6.99)

Below

2.462∗∗∗
(6.78)

Average Change

Distance Peers

Constant

Observations

439

576

Distance
Above

−0.094∗∗∗
(−3.16)
−1.448
(−1.54)
439

Distance
Below

−0.005
(−0.24)
2.331∗∗∗
(3.52)
576

Above

−3.685∗∗∗
(−6.64)

Below

2.010∗∗∗
(5.31)

517

498

Distance
Above

Distance
Below

−0.127∗∗∗
(−4.40)
−0.254
(−0.27)
517

−0.050∗∗
(−2.24)
0.745
(1.10)
498

This table reports results for the change in the reported marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of respondents to our randomized control trial before and after being provided
with information about the reported MPC of income peers based on representative US estimates. We report the average changes and the OLS coefficients for regressing changes
on the respondent’s MPC distance from the MPC of income peers for self-reported MPC at the time the survey was run (during the COVID-19 crisis) and in normal times. Users’
distance from their peers is standardized to have a unit standard deviation. Numbers in parentheses are 𝑡-statistics based on Huber–White standard errors.

Table 8
External validity 2: Peer MPC information and change in MPC by demographics.

Distance Peers

Observations

Distance Peers

Observations

Gender

Men

−0.086∗∗
(−2.15)
322

Children

No

−0.094∗∗
(−2.46)
293

Women

−0.181∗∗∗
(−4.29)
190

Yes

−0.170∗∗∗
(−3.83)
221

Education

College

−0.122∗∗∗
(−4.02)
397

No College

−0.185∗∗∗
(−2.28)
119

Marital status

Partnered

−0.119∗∗∗
(−3.67)
386

Single

−0.166∗∗
(−2.53)
128

Political Views

Financial Literacy

Liberal

−0.185∗∗∗
(−3.98)
242

No Liberal

−0.072∗∗
(−2.04)
275

High

−0.193∗∗∗
(−4.33)
190

Low

−0.084∗∗
(−2.22)
327

This table reports results for changes in the reported marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of respondents to our randomized control trial
before and after being provided with information about the reported MPC of income peers based on representative US estimates. We report
the average changes and the OLS coefficients for regressing changes on the respondent’s MPC distance from the MPC of income peers for
self-reported MPC in normal times. Users’ distance from their peers is standardized to have a unit standard deviation. Numbers in parentheses
are 𝑡-statistics based on Huber–White standard errors. Each panel splits the sample by demographics that are unobserved in the Status Money
sample.

consumption framework but in line with evidence from recent episodes
of spending behavior in response to government transfers during the
COVID-19 crisis (Coibion et al. (2020b). This result is consistent with
recent evidence in macroeconomics about heightened precautionary
savings motives in times of economic crises (e.g., see Coibion et al.
(2024) and D’acunto et al. (2023))

9. Implications for competing theories of overconsumption

The main contribution of our paper is to isolate and quantify the
information channel of peer effects in a setting that rules out a role for
common shocks across peers or peer pressure and in which connections
among peers are not formed endogenously. However, an additional key
value added of our setting and identification strategy is that we can
provide insights on the extent to which several mainstream theories
of overconsumption/ undersaving behavior are more or less consistent
with empirical evidence.23

In what

follows, we consider both preference-based theories
(Present Bias and Keeping Up with the Joneses) and information-based
theories (Wealth Signaling, Speculative Disagreement, and Visibility
Bias).

Present Bias. In Laibson (1997), present-biased agents overcon-
sume because they discount the future by more than a standard neo-
classical agent. Specifically, the model posits a functional form for the
discount rate whereby the present-biased agent’s preferences converge
to those of a neoclassical agent in the long run but differ in the short
run (‘‘𝛽 − 𝛿 preferences’’). When optimizing intertemporal consumption

23 We are indebted to David Hirshleifer for inspiring this section based on
his discussion of our work at the AI & Big Data in Finance Research (ABFR)
Forum.

based on present-biased preferences, this feature of discounting leads
agents to systematically frontload consumption in each period and
discount the utility from subsequent-periods’ consumption by more
than a standard agent, and hence ultimately to undersave relative to
standard agents. Present bias theory is, therefore, an asocial preference-
based theory in the sense that others’ behavior does not affect agents’
consumption choices. By construction, a standard form of present bias
theory cannot explain the key mechanism we uncover in the paper,
whereby agents change their consumption choices after observing in-
formation about peers’ spending. To explain this finding, one would
need to incorporate a form of learning about one’s own discount rate
based on signals about others’ discount rates in the baseline present
bias theory. In this case, agents would update their discount rates
based on signals about others’ consumption. At the same time, such
adaptation would still not produce the asymmetric effects of peers’
spending information on agents’ own choices based on whether they
spend more or less than their peers. More generally, such adaptation
would change the nature of the present bias theory from a preference-
based model of overconsumption into an information-based model that
includes a role for socialization.

Keeping up with the Joneses. (Dupor and Liu, 2003) proposed an-
other successful preference-based theory of overconsumption in which
agents consume in coordination with the consumption of others. This
preference-based model thus includes a role for socialization. At the
same time, in its standard form, the model is deterministic, and agents
are assumed to know the consumption levels of their neighbors
(‘‘Joneses’’)—they do not need to learn it. In this setting, disclosing
information about peers’ expenditures should not affect agents’ con-
sumption choices because agents learn nothing from the information
that is provided to them, which they already know. The original model
could be extended by introducing uncertainty about peers’ consumption
levels, in which case a reaction in terms of consumption choices when

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385821F. D’Acunto et al.

agents learn information about their peers’ spending would arise, and
this reaction would be stronger the more informative are peers’ signals.
This adjusted model, though, could barely explain agents’ asymmetric
reactions based on their position relative to peers. If anything, the
model would predict a stronger reaction and convergence for un-
derspenders, who want to keep up with peers’ consumption levels,
relative to overspenders, who are already ‘‘ahead of the Joneses’’. These
patterns are the opposite of what we find non only for the users on the
app (who might care about savings more than others) but also in the
general population through our RCT.

Wealth Signaling. (Bagwell and Bernheim, 1996) and Charles
et al. (2009) propose an information-based theory of overconsumption
whereby agents want to be perceived as wealthy and learn about others’
wealth by observing others’ consumption patterns. Agents do not, how-
ever, learn about how much they should consume by observing others’
consumption patterns, at least partly because agents do not know each
individual’s wealth level but just the overall wealth distribution in the
economy. For this reason, in its original form, this theory does not
accommodate all of our main findings. One could envision an extension
of the original model whereby individuals do not know how wealth is
distributed in society. In this case, disclosing information about peers’
spending, like in the app we study, might help agents learn about such
distribution. This extension would be consistent with the consumption
changes by the users in our setting after observing the information
displayed by the app. However, even in this case, reactions would not
necessarily be asymmetric based on agents’ position relative to their
peers. To explain all our facts, additional modifications to the original
model should be introduced.

Speculative Disagreement.

In this information-based theory,
Heyerdahl-Larsen and Walden (2022) posit that agents with strong
priors disagree about future economic conditions and bet against each
other in asset markets. Each agent believes she will become wealthy
by trading against those with starkly different priors about future eco-
nomic conditions. For this reason, all agents (irrespective of the sign of
their priors) have high expectations about future wealth levels, which
might lead them to overconsume. Based on the original formulation
of the model, disclosing information through the app should not affect
agents’ consumption choices because agents have strong priors and do
not update their beliefs over time. One could envision an extension of
the original model whereby agents update their beliefs after observing
others’ consumption choices. In this case, agents should change their
consumption behavior after observing the information displayed by the
app. However, and similar to the other theories discussed so far, the
asymmetric reaction to peer information provision across overspenders
and underspenders would remain unexplained.

Visibility Bias. (Han et al., 2019) propose another information-
based theory of overconsumption, according to which agents do not
know their optimal savings rate and rely on others’ consumption as a
signal to drive their choices. Agents do not observe the full set of others’
consumption transactions but only observe the most visible portion of
others’ consumption, which tends to be the most conspicuous. As a
result, agents tend to overestimate other people’s consumption, which
leads them to overspend/undersave. In this model, the disclosure of
information about peers’ full consumption expenditures should cause
them to change their consumption in order to converge to their peers’
consumption, which is in line with our main findings. In addition, the
effect should be stronger for more informative disclosures—another
fact we find in our empirical analysis. In addition, some model pa-
rameterizations in Han et al. (2019) can also generate the asymmetric
effect we document, whereby overspenders decrease consumption by
more than underspenders increase consumption after everybody learns
information about peers’ overall spending.

To sum up, our empirical results have implications for theories of
overconsumption: They
for
provide novel
information-based theories of overconsumption given that the agents
in both our settings – app users and a non-selected RCT population –

empirical

support

react to information about peers’ overall spending and MPCs. Within
the set of information-based models, the Visibility Bias Theory of Han
et al. (2019) can, even in its original form, explain the broader set of
empirical facts we document in the paper. Non-information theories,
on the other hand, are unable to explain our findings because they
would predict no reaction on the part of app users upon receiving
information about their peers’ consumption unless a role for learning
about uncertain model parameters was introduced.

10. Conclusions

We study the effects of providing consumers with crowdsourced
information about unknown demographic peers’ spending through a
FinTech app. We find that all users, on average, converge to their
peers’ spending, but the effect is stronger for users who learn that they
overspend relative to their peers. Moreover, users who are exposed to
a more informative signal react more to peer spending relative to other
users and the effects build up persistently over time. We replicate these
results in an RCT on a population that is not selected based on their
interest in observing peer information, which supports the external
validity of our findings.

Our findings speak to the growing use of algorithmic advice in
economic agents’ decision making. To the best of our knowledge, this
is among the very first studies of the effects of robo-advising tools
that target consumption/saving choices (D’Acunto and Rossi, 2020),
which is perhaps the most important economic decision consumers
make through their life. Future research should investigate the optimal
design of such tools as well as the economic channels through which
their effects are transmitted to decision-makers.

Moreover, whether reacting to peer information is optimal and
whether peer spending contains any relevant information for con-
sumers is an open question that should be addressed in future research.
If increasing the average saving rate in the economy was the policy
objective, peer information might be a successful tool due to the larger
reaction of users who lie above their peers. Our results, though, indicate
the scope for heterogeneous and redistributional effects that future
research should isolate and study.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Francesco D’Acunto: Writing – original draft, Methodology, For-
mal analysis. Alberto G. Rossi: Writing – original draft, Methodology,
Formal analysis. Michael Weber: Writing – original draft, Methodol-
ogy, Formal analysis.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

We have shared the link to our data and code at: https://data.

mendeley.com/datasets/4kck86prjg/2.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Additional tables and figures can be found in the supplementary

material online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103858.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385822F. D’Acunto et al.

References

Agarwal, S., Qian, W., 2014. Consumption and debt response to unanticipated income
shocks: Evidence from a natural experiment in Singapore. Amer. Econ. Rev. 104
(12), 4205–4230.

Agarwal, S., Qian, W., Zou, X., 2021. Thy neighbor’s misfortune: Peer effect on

consumption. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 13 (2), 1–25.

D’Acunto, F., Rossi, A., 2024. Taming behavioral biases in consumer decision-making:

The role of robo-advisors. Oxf. Res. Encycl. Econ. Finance.

D’Acunto, F., Weber, M., Xie, J., 2019c. Punish one, teach a hundred: The sobering
effect of punishment on the unpunished. pp. 01–66, Fama-Miller Working Paper.
De Quidt, J., Haushofer, J., Roth, C., 2018. Measuring and bounding experimenter

demand. Amer. Econ. Rev. 108 (11), 3266–3302.

DellaVigna, S., Pope, D., 2017. Predicting experimental results: Who knows what? J.

Allcott, H., 2011. Social norms and energy conservation. J. Public Econ. 95 (9–10),

Polit. Econ..

1082–1095.

Allcott, H., Rogers, T., 2014. The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral inter-
ventions: Experimental evidence from energy conservation. Amer. Econ. Rev. 104
(10), 3003–3037.

Attanasio, O.P., Weber, G., 1995. Is consumption growth consistent with intertemporal
optimization? evidence from the consumer expenditure survey. J. Polit. Econ. 103
(6), 1121–1157.

Bagwell, L.S., Bernheim, B.D., 1996. Veblen effects in a theory of conspicuous

consumption. Am. Econ. Rev. 349–373.

Bailey, M., Cao, R., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., 2018. The economic effects of social
networks: Evidence from the housing market. J. Polit. Econ. 126 (6), 2224–2276.
Banks, J., Blundell, R., Tanner, S., 1998. Is there a retirement-savings puzzle? Amer.

Econ. Rev. 769–788.

Bazley, W.J., Cronqvist, H., Mormann, M., 2021. Visual finance: The pervasive effects

of red on investor behavior. Management science 67 (9), 5616–5641.

Bernheim, B.D., Skinner, J., Weinberg, S., 2001. What accounts for the variation in
retirement wealth among US households? Amer. Econ. Rev. 91 (4), 832–857.
Beshears, J., Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., Milkman, K.L., 2015. The effect
of providing peer information on retirement savings decisions. J. Finance 70 (3),
1161–1201.

Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., Welch, I., 1998. Learning from the behavior of others:
Conformity, fads, and informational cascades. J. Econ. Perspect. 12 (3), 151–170.
Bursztyn, L., Ederer, F., Ferman, B., Yuchtman, N., 2014. Understanding mechanisms
underlying peer effects: Evidence from a field experiment on financial decisions.
Econometrica 82 (4), 1273–1301.

Chak, I., Croxson, K., D’Acunto, F., Reuter, J., Rossi, A., Shaw, J., 2022. Robo-advice

for borrower repayment decisions. (61), FCA Occasional. paper.

Charles, K.K., Hurst, E., Roussanov, N., 2009. Conspicuous consumption and race. Q.

J. Econ. 124 (2), 425–467.

Coibion, O., Georgarakos, D., Gorodnichenko, Y., Kenny, G., Weber, M., 2024. The
effect of macroeconomic uncertainty on household spending. Am. Econom. Rev.
114 (3), 645–677.

Coibion, O., Georgarakos, D., Gorodnichenko, Y., Weber, M., 2023. Forward guidance
and household expectations. J. European Econom. Assoc. 21 (5), 2131–2171.
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Weber, M., 2020b. How Did US Consumers Use Their
Stimulus Payments?. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Weber, M., 2022. Monetary policy communications
and their effects on household inflation expectations. J. Political Economy 130 (6),
1537–1584.

D’Acunto, F., 2018. Identity and choice under risk. Working Paper.
D’Acunto, F., 2019. Tear down this wall street: Anti-finance rhetoric, subjective beliefs,

and investment. Working Paper.

D’Acunto, F., Hoang, D., Paloviita, M., Weber, M., 2019a. Human frictions in the

transmission of economic policy. Working Paper.

Dupor, B., Liu, W.-F., 2003. Jealousy and equilibrium overconsumption. Am. Econ. Rev.

93 (1), 423–428.

Ganong, P., Noel, P., 2019. Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and

normative implications. Am. Econ. Rev. 109 (7), 2383–2424.

Gargano, A., Rossi, A.G., 2020. There’s an app for that: Goal-setting and saving in the

FinTech era. Available at SSRN.

Gelman, M., Kariv, S., Shapiro, M.D., Silverman, D., Tadelis, S., 2014. Harnessing
naturally occurring data to measure the response of spending to income. Science
345 (6193), 212–215.

Gelman, M., Kariv, S., Shapiro, M.D., Silverman, D., Tadelis, S., 2018. How individuals
respond to a liquidity shock: Evidence from the 2013 government shutdown. J.
Public Econ.

Han, B., Hirshleifer, D., Walden, J., 2019. Visibility Bias in the Transmission of Con-
sumption Beliefs and Undersaving. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Hansen, B.E., 1996. Inference when a nuisance parameter is not identified under the

null hypothesis. Econometrica 413–430.

Hansen, B.E., 2000. Sample splitting and threshold estimation. Econometrica 68 (3),

575–603.

Hansen, B.E., 2017. Regression kink with an unknown threshold. J. Bus. Econom.

Statist. 35 (2), 228–240.

Hau, H., Huang, Y., Shan, H., Sheng, Z., 2019. How FinTech enters China’s credit

market. In: AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 109, pp. 60–64.

Heyerdahl-Larsen, C., Walden, J., 2022. Distortions and efficiency in production
economies with heterogeneous beliefs. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (4), 1775–1812.
Jappelli, T., Pistaferri, L., 2010. The consumption response to income changes. Annu.

Rev. Econ. 2 (1), 479–506.

Jappelli, T., Pistaferri, L., 2014. Fiscal policy and MPC heterogeneity. Am. Econ. J.:

Macroecon. 6 (4), 107–136.

Kaustia, M., Knüpfer, S., 2012. Peer performance and stock market entry. J. Financ.

Econ. 104 (2), 321–338.

Kuziemko, I., Norton, M., Saez, E., Stantcheva, S., 2015. How elastic are preferences
for redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey experiments. Amer. Econ. Rev.
105 (4), 1478–1508.

Laibson, D., 1997. Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting*. Q. J. Econ. 112 (2),

443–478. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/003355397555253.

Lee, S.K., 2019. Fintech Nudges: Overspending Messages and Personal Finance

Management. NYU Stern School of Business.

Lian, C., Ma, Y., Wang, C., 2019. Low interest rates and risk-taking: Evidence from

individual investment decisions. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (6), 2107–2148.

Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2007. Baby boomer retirement security: The roles of
literacy, and housing wealth. J. Monetary Econ. 54 (1),

financial

planning,
205–224.

Manski, C.F., 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem.

D’acunto, F., Hoang, D., Paloviita, M., Weber, M., 2023. IQ, expectations, and choice.

Rev. Econ. Stud. 60 (3), 531–542.

Rev. Econom. Stud. 90 (5), 2292–2325.

D’Acunto, F., Hoang, D., Weber, M., 2022. Managing households’ expectations with

unconventional policies. Rev. Financial Stud. 35 (4), 1597–1642.

D’Acunto, F., Malmendier, U., Weber, M., 2021. Gender roles produce divergent

economic expectations. Proceed. National Academy Sci. 118 (21), e2008534118.

D’Acunto, F., Prabhala, N., Rossi, A.G., 2019b. The promises and pitfalls of

robo-advising. Rev. Financ. Stud.

D’Acunto, F., Rauter, T., Scheuch, C.K., Weber, M., 2020c. Perceived Precautionary
Savings Motives: Evidence from FinTech. Technical Report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

D’Acunto, F., Rossi, A.G., 2020. Robo-advising. In: Handbook of Technological Finance.

Palgrave Macmillan.

D’Acunto, F., Rossi, A.G., 2021. New frontiers of robo-advising: Consumption, saving,
debt management, and taxes. In: Handbook of Machine Learning for Financial
Markets. Palgrave Macmillan.

D’Acunto, F., Rossi, A., 2023. Robo-advice: Transforming households into rational

economic agents. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ.

Mas, A., Moretti, E., 2009. Peers at work. Amer. Econ. Rev. 99 (1), 112–145.
Maturana, G., Nickerson, J., 2019. Teachers teaching teachers: The role of workplace

peer effects in financial decisions. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (10), 3920–3957.

Maturana, G., Nickerson, J., 2020. Real effects of workers’ financial distress: Evidence

from teacher spillovers. J. Financ. Econ. 136 (1), 137–151.

Olafsson, A., Pagel, M., 2017. The Ostrich in us: Selective Attention to Financial
Accounts, Income, Spending, and Liquidity. Technical Report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Olafsson, A., Pagel, M., 2018. The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from personal finance

management software. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (11), 4398–4446.

Ouimet, P., Tate, G., 2020. Learning from coworkers: Peer effects on individual

investment decisions. J. Finance 75 (1), 133–172.

Parker, J.A., Souleles, N.S., 2019. Reported effects versus revealed-preference estimates:
Evidence from the propensity to spend tax rebates. Am. Econ. Rev.: Insights 1 (3),
273–290.

Reher, M., Sokolinski, S., 2021. Automation and inequality in wealth management.

Available at SSRN 3515707.

Rossi, A.G., Utkus, S.P., 2020. Who benefits from robo-advising? Evidence from machine

learning. Working Paper.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385823