Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Financial constraints, cash flow timing patterns, and asset prices✩
Weiping Hu a, Kai Li b,∗, Xiao Zhang c
a Peking University HSBC Business School, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, 518055, China
b Peking University HSBC Business School and PHBS Sargent Institute of Quantitative Economics and Finance, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, 518055, China
c Chinese Academy of Finance and Development, Central University of Finance and Economics, Haidian District, Beijing, 100081, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Cash flows
Cash flow timing patterns
Asset prices
Equity financing costs

1. Introduction

We show that firms collect almost 70% of their cash flows in the second half of the fiscal year, and that
firms that collect more cash by year-end earn a 6.8% higher per annum risk premium and save more cash.
We rationalize these facts in a quantitative investment-based asset pricing model. Immediate cash payments
negatively affect profitability, but reduce equity financing costs by increasing information transparency.
Financially constrained firms optimally collect more cash at year-end when firms’ performance attracts more
attention and information transparency is more valuable. Such behavior further results in greater exposure to
aggregate productivity and financial shocks.

Using US firm-level data, we show that cash flows display strong
timing patterns: specifically, firms receive almost 70% of their cash
flows in the second half of the year.1 Most empirical and theoretical
studies of cash flow volatility have focused on exogenous cash flow
shocks and their impact on firm decisions.2 This paper, however,
studies firms’ endogenous decision with respect to cash flow timing
patterns with financial constraints, and the implications of this decision
for corporate policies and the cross-section of stock returns. The central
empirical finding is that firms that collect more cash by year-end
earn higher expected stock returns and save more cash. To compre-
hensively explain these empirical observations, we develop a dynamic
investment-based model, which offers mechanisms that underlie the
relationships between cash flow timing patterns, corporate investment
and cash-saving decisions, and their impact on financial outcomes.

Our model establishes a connection between year-end cash collec-
tion and financing costs, consistent with the empirical observations.
The key intuition is that, when selling goods to customers, firms can
receive cash or unpaid revenue that is composed of working capital,
such as account receivables and inventory investment. Requiring cash
payments is costly because a supplier must offer customers a substantial
discount as a reward for paying cash. Meanwhile, unpaid revenue is

an important indicator of information transparency.3 A higher unpaid
revenue indicates lower transparency, resulting in higher information
asymmetry and financing costs (Francis et al., 2004; García-Teruel
et al., 2014). Since year-end performance attracts more attention, firms
have an incentive to collect cash by year-end and lower their financing
costs by decreasing information asymmetry. This is particularly rele-
vant for financially constrained firms, which have a greater incentive
to collect cash flows by year-end to improve information transparency.
In summary, cash flow timing patterns provide valuable insights into
firm fundamentals and firms’ exposure to aggregate risks, including
implications for asset prices and real quantities.

We begin by presenting four empirical facts about cash flow timing
patterns. First, the patterns are prevalent at an aggregate level and
persist over decades. Second, financially constrained firms show a
more significant cash flow timing pattern, suggesting that year-end
cash collection (hereafter, YCC)4 is positively related to financial con-
straints. Third, financially constrained firms with higher year-end cash
collection earn a significantly higher risk premium, which we refer to
as the year-end cash collection premium. Finally, we show that the
year-end cash collection is mainly driven by the within-year spread of
inventories and receivables, and that the YCC premium is not simply
driven by annual inventory growth (Belo and Lin, 2012) and trade
credit effects (Grigoris et al., 2023).

✩

Toni M. Whited was the editor for this article. We are grateful to the editor and an anonymous referee for their valuable comments that have helped improve

the manuscript.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: kaili825@gmail.com (K. Li).

1 Hereafter, we substitute ‘‘year’’ for ‘‘fiscal year’’ whenever possible for simplicity’s sake.
2 These studies include, among others, Minton and Schrand (1999), Han and Qiu (2007), Bates et al. (2009), Duchin (2010), and Brown et al. (2021).
3 See, for example, Sloan (1996), Bradshaw et al. (2001), Teoh and Zhang (2011), and Hirshleifer et al. (2012).
4 We measure YCC as the decrease in noncash net working capital from fiscal Q2 to Q4. See details in Section 2.2.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103855
Received 9 November 2022; Received in revised form 19 April 2024; Accepted 21 April 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103855Availableonline17May20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.W. Hu et al.

Motivated by these empirical facts, we propose a dynamic investment-

based model to explain the positive relationship between financial
constraints, operating cash flow spread (hereafter, OCF spread),5 and
the YCC premium. In this model, firms produce output using a stochas-
tic technology that is subject to both idiosyncratic and aggregate
productivity shocks. Aggregate issuance cost shocks are stochastic and
independent of aggregate productivity shocks. Firms make investment,
cash savings, cash payments, equity financing, and payout decisions
to maximize their value. Idiosyncratic productivity shocks drive cross-
sectional heterogeneity. Our model has three key features. First, sales
are not immediately paid in cash. Demand for immediate cash pay-
ments is costly, as suppliers must offer a substantial discount as a
reward for paying cash; thus, higher demand for cash payments de-
creases firms’ profitability. Second, equity issuance costs are a function
of cash collection. A higher collection of cash payments results in
lower information asymmetry and lower equity issuance costs. Third,
we assume a deterministic regime shift in external attention. The
literature shows that fiscal year-end earnings reports attract more
attention (Brown and Pinello, 2007; Fan et al., 2010; Frankel et al.,
2017). Financially constrained firms have high financing needs and are
more likely to collect cash late in the year to increase the transparency
of earnings information, which can lower incurred external financing
costs.

The cross-sectional variation in expected stock returns arises en-
dogenously in our model because of different degrees of exposure to
aggregate productivity and financial shocks. Financially constrained
firms with high equity financing needs collect cash payments by year-
end to avoid the high agency cost of year-end unpaid revenue. There-
fore, a positive relationship between YCC and financial constraints is
well established. We then document that a high YCC firm is riskier
for two reasons. First, high YCC firms demand more cash payments for
current sales. The future cash flows of high YCC firms primarily consist
of immediate payments, and thus high YCC firms are more positively
exposed to aggregate productivity shocks. Second, firms that collect
more cash flows by year-end decrease their operating cash flows in the
next period, meaning that they are more likely to issue equity in the
future. Thus, high YCC firms are more positively exposed to aggregate
financial shocks. Our findings show that year-end cash collection leads
to more risk exposure and higher stock returns.

Our model also suggests the presence of cross-sectional variation in
cash decisions. First, we find that higher YCC firms, which have a more
positive relationship between expected marginal financing costs and
the discount factor, have a greater incentive to save cash. Specifically,
high YCC firms have high financing needs in the next period so that
they are more influenced by aggregate financial shocks. In the spirit
of Palazzo (2012), the positive relation between expected marginal
financing costs and the discount factor (i.e., higher expected marginal
financing costs associated with higher marginal utility) results in a
higher marginal value of cash. Additionally, we also find an apparent
pattern of cash holdings within a year in high YCC firms; that is, firms
tend to hold more cash in the second half of the year relative to the first
half. This seasonal change in cash holdings is closely related to year-end
cash collection because there is a substitutable relationship between
unpaid revenue and cash holdings (Opler et al., 1999). Specifically,
firms would substitute cash holdings for unpaid revenue at year-end
when unpaid revenue is disciplined the most. Therefore, at year-end,
high YCC firms without high unpaid revenue carried over to the next
period have a greater incentive to hold cash than they do in the first
half of the year.

Quantitatively, the baseline model with reasonable parameter val-
ues closely matches the aggregate- and firm-level moments of asset
prices and real quantities. Of particular significance, our two-factor

model predicts the misspecification of CAPM. We demonstrate that the
presence of higher marginal financing costs in the second half of the
year not only facilitates the accurate matching of cash flow timing
patterns but also effectively replicates the CAPM pricing errors that
align with the observed data. In addition, we reproduce the YCC spread
using our simulated data and provide cross-sectional characteristics
at the portfolio level. In detail, we show that high YCC firms in the
constrained subsample earn a higher return and also display a higher
OCF spread, a lower return on assets (ROA), and higher cash savings, all
consistent with our model intuition. This evidence on the YCC spread
and associated relation with other firm decisions is also observed in the
data.

We then present empirical evidence supporting our model assump-
tions and implications in Section 5. First, we compare the risk exposure
of the lowest YCC portfolio to that of the highest YCC portfolio to
understand the cross-sectional variation in risk premiums. We show
that firms with higher YCC are more exposed to aggregate TFP and
issuance cost shocks. Using the generalized method of moments (GMM),
we estimate the standard asset pricing equation and find that aggregate
TFP and issuance cost shocks are significantly and positively priced in
the cross-section of stock returns.6 Second, we use SDC platinum data
to justify that financing costs are higher in the second half of the year,
and confirm that unpaid revenues significantly impact linear financing
costs. Additionally, we find that unpaid revenues have a greater impact
on financing costs by year-end. The results support our assumptions
that YCC is related to financial constraints and financial cost shocks.
We also discuss alternative channels that may lead to YCC, such as tax
reduction, managers’ compensation, and liquidity management; how-
ever, none of these channels explains the correlation between YCC and
financial constraints. Further, we examine the ability of firm-level YCC
to predict cross-sectional stock returns by using (Fama and MacBeth,
1973) regressions. The slope coefficient associated with a firm’s YCC is
economically and statistically significant for the financially constrained
subsample, but not for the unconstrained subsample. When we control
for various firm characteristics that predict stock returns, we find that
a one-unit-standard-deviation increase in the constrained firm’s YCC is
associated with a 1.370% increase in the corresponding expected stock
return.

Finally, we verify that the positive YCC-return relation is not driven
by other alternative channels. In detail, we conduct a comprehensive
empirical analysis to test the validity of the YCC premium. Our results
show that our YCC spread can still survive after we control for accrual
effects in Sloan (1996), or for the cash-related premium in Palazzo
(2012).

Related literature

Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, our
paper contributes to a well-developed literature that examines the
dynamic implications of financial constraints on investment and cash
holdings. Riddick and Whited (2009) and Bolton et al. (2011) suggest
that firms hold cash because of financial constraints and cash flow
shocks. Unlike previous studies, our paper focuses on endogenous cash
collection decisions. Our findings also suggest that riskier firms save
more cash, especially those exposed to both aggregate productivity and
financial shocks. This finding is similar to that in Palazzo (2012), but
our study extends the focus beyond aggregate productivity shocks.

Our paper is also closely related to the literature that shows that
equity financing costs are time varying. Warusawitharana and Whited
(2015) and Bolton et al. (2013) suggest that equity financing costs vary
because of mispricing. Eisfeldt and Muir (2016) focus on the role of
time-varying aggregate financing costs. Our paper complements this

5 Operating cash flow spread is defined as the difference between operating
cash flows in the late and early quarters of the year. See details in Appendix B.

6 We note that positive aggregate issuance cost shocks reduce firms’

financing costs.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038552W. Hu et al.

literature by endogenously linking equity issuance costs to year-end
cash collection decisions.

Our paper also contributes to the trade credit and earnings man-
agement literature. Jones (1991), Dechow et al. (1995), and Leuz
et al. (2003) show that higher unpaid revenue leads to higher agency
problems, and that short sellers discipline firms from earnings manage-
ment (Massa et al., 2015; Fang et al., 2016). Grigoris et al. (2023) doc-
ument that trade-credit improves supplier-customer links and hedges
aggregate searching costs for customers. Our paper complements these
studies by quantifying the effect of unpaid revenue on aggregate eq-
uity issuance costs. More financially constrained firms have a greater
incentive to decrease financing costs by increasing information trans-
parency. This effect is widely recognized, but is nonetheless absent in
the literature.

Our paper contributes to the investment-based asset pricing liter-
ature as well, which explores the asset pricing implications of risk
exposure to aggregate shocks (Zhang, 2005; Li, 2011; Belo and Lin,
2012; Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou, 2013; Belo et al., 2019; Lin et al.,
2020). In addition, our paper contributes to the asset pricing literature
that studies the implications of financial frictions for the cross-section
of expected returns. Ai et al. (2020) finds that firms with low asset
collateralizability are more financially constrained and riskier. Li and
Tsou (2019) shows that the leased capital ratio measure is positively
correlated with financial constraints and that firms with high leased
capital are less risky. In contrast to these papers, our paper contributes
to the literature by focusing on the implication of equity financing
frictions on year-end cash collection, cash savings, and the cross-section
of expected stock returns.

Finally, our paper contributes to the extensive macroeconomics
literature that studies the role of credit market frictions in generating
fluctuations across business cycles (see Quadrini, 2011 and Brunner-
meier et al., 2012 for recent reviews). The papers most closely related
to ours are those emphasizing the importance of borrowing constraints
and contract enforcements (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997, 2019; Gertler
and Kiyotaki, 2010; He and Krishnamurthy, 2013; Brunnermeier and
Sannikov, 2014; Elenev et al., 2021). Gomes et al. (2015) study the
asset pricing implications of credit market frictions in a production
economy. In contrast to papers in this literature, our paper focuses on
equity market frictions. Specifically, we allow firms to decrease equity
financing costs by increasing their cash collection, which increases the
information transparency of earnings and relaxes financial constraints.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
provide empirical facts about cash flow timing patterns and the relation
between YCC and excess stock returns. In Section 3, we propose a ra-
tionale for our empirical observations and present a dynamic stochastic
model in which a firm manages its cash collection, investments, and
cash holdings. In Section 4, we discuss the calibration and simulation of
our model to evaluate the way in which YCC explains firm risk exposure
and firm characteristics. In Section 5, we provide more empirical
evidence to support the assumption and implications of our model. In
Section 6, we rule out alternative explanations, and we conclude this
paper with Section 7.

2. Empirical facts

In this section, we present the prevalence of cash flow timing
patterns resulting from YCC and their relation to financial constraints.

2.1. Data

Our main sample covers the period between 1988 and 2022. We
begin with all US public firms for which we have accounting informa-
tion from the Compustat Fundamental annual and quarterly databases.
We use information on issuance fees from SDC Platinum database.
Monthly stock returns are from the Center for Research in Security
Prices (CRSP). Asset pricing factors related to the (Fama and French,

2015) five-factor model and the (Carhart, 1997) four-factor model are
downloaded from the data library of Kenneth French. We adopt the
standard screening process for the CRSP/Compustat Merged Database.
We exclude regulated utilities (SIC codes 4900-4999) and financial
firms (SIC codes 6000-6999), and only keep domestic common shares
trading on NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq, older than 1 year since the IPO.7
Following Almeida et al. (2004), we remove firm-years where cash
holdings exceeded total assets, or displayed asset or sales growth
exceeding 100%. Additionally, we exclude firms with less than $1
million in physical capital and sales, and less than $5 million in market
capitalization. We correct for potential delisting bias in stock returns
following Shumway (1997).

2.2. Measuring cash flows, earnings, and year-end cash collection

We measure the year-end cash collection for firm 𝑖 in year 𝑡 as the
decrease in noncash net working capital from fiscal Q2 to Q4 scaled by
lagged total assets:8

(1)

YCC𝑖,𝑡 =

NWCQ2

𝑖,𝑡

𝑖,𝑡 − NWCQ4
AT𝑖,𝑡−1
𝑖,𝑡 and NWCQ4

,

in which NWCQ2
𝑖,𝑡 are the noncash net working capital of
fiscal Q2 and Q4, respectively. The numerator of YCC𝑖,𝑡, the change
in noncash net working capital between fiscal Q2 and Q4, reflects the
amount of collected cash near the end of the year.9 Higher YCC𝑖,𝑡
means more cash flows are collected by year-end, resulting in higher
within-year volatility of cash flows.

The adjustment of YCC𝑖,𝑡 can not only affect cash flow distribution
within a year but also contributes to the difference between earnings
and operating cash flows. Specifically, it is customary for firms to make
sales and receive payments from customers at a later time, in which
case earnings, currently in the form of working capital, are converted
into cash flows in the future. Thus, the working capital management
affects the mismatch between earnings recognition and cash payments,
which drives an important difference between earnings and operating
cash flows. We employ ROA (Compustat item IB) to measure a firm’s
profitability according to Belo et al. (2017), and we use net cash
receipts from operating activities (Compustat item OANCF + XINT) to
construct operating cash flows following Lian and Ma (2020). Table B.1
reports details about the construction of variables.

2.3. Cash flow timing patterns

2.3.1. The prevalence of cash flow timing patterns

The literature suggests that unpaid revenue is associated with earn-
ings management issues. Since year-end performance attracts more at-
tention (Chae, 2005), more cash flows are collected at year-end (Frankel
et al., 2017). Using US firm-level data, we find significant timing
patterns of cash flows. Fig. 1 shows the time-series plot of semiannual
average operating cash flows from 1987 to 2021. Firms receive more
cash flows in the second half of the year relative to the first half. On
average, firms received about 30% of their cash flows in the first half of
the year, whereas they received almost 70% of their cash flows in the
second half. Overall, we find strong cash flow timing patterns, which
have been persistent for decades.

7 The literature suggests that IPO has a large impact on the firm’s valuations
and fundamentals (Ibbotson, 1975; Fama and French, 2004; Bates et al., 2009).
8 In Internet Appendix A.1, we decompose YCC and provide a more detailed
explanation. We find that the YCC premium and the cross-sectional variation
in YCC are mainly driven by changes in accounts receivable and inventories.
For robustness, we also provide an alternative measure of YCC, YCCclean. The
measure excludes the alternative roles of NWC which may contaminate our
results. The results are reported in Table A.2 in Internet Appendix A.3.

9 Noncash net working capital is measured as noncash current assets (item
ACT-CHE) minus current liabilities (LCT) less short-term debt (DLC) and taxes
payable (TXP). The components of noncash net working capital and YCC are
introduced in detail in Internet Appendix A.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038553W. Hu et al.

Fig. 1. The timing pattern of operating cash flows.
This figure shows the prevalence of cash flow timing patterns. We report the average ratio of semiannual cash flows to cumulative cash flows within a firm’s fiscal year. Blue dots
indicate the second half of the fiscal year. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 1
Financial constraints and cash flow timing patterns.

Early OCF (Q1+Q2)
Late OCF (Q1+Q2)
OCF Spread (Late–Early)

Con

Mean

0.037
0.067
0.029

SD

0.005
0.006
0.007

Uncon

Mean

0.053
0.075
0.021

SD

0.003
0.007
0.007

Con-Uncon

Diff

0.008***

This table presents summary statistics for cash flow timing patterns in our sample.
The detailed definition of OCF refers to Table B.1. Early OCF is the cumulative
operating cash flow from fiscal Q1 to Q2 divided by lagged total assets. Late OCF
is the cumulative operating cash flow from fiscal Q3 to Q4 divided by lagged total
assets. OCF Spread is the corresponding difference between Late OCF and Early OCF.
We split the whole sample into constrained and unconstrained firms at the end of
the fiscal year with the WW index, constructed by Whited and Wu (2006). We report
time-series averages and the standard deviation of the cross-sectional mean of these
variables value-weighted by firm total asset at fiscal year-end. The sample period is
from 1987 to 2021. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

2.3.2. Cash flow timing patterns and financial constraint

Table 1 reports the average ratios of cash flows to total assets in
the early (Q1 and Q2) and late (Q3 and Q4) quarters of the year that
are associated with financial constraints, for which the constraint is
measured by the Whited-Wu index (hereafter, the WW index, follow-
ing Whited and Wu, 2006). The operating cash flow ratios of financially
constrained firms in the early and late quarters of the year are 0.037
and 0.067, respectively. For financially constrained firms, the average
OCF spread, defined as the difference between cash flows in the late and
early quarters of the year divided by total assets, is 0.029; however, this
term is 0.021 for unconstrained firms. The difference in the average
OCF spread between financially constrained firms and unconstrained
firms is 0.008, which is economically large and statistically signifi-
cant at the 1% level. In summary, this result implies that financially
constrained firms have a greater incentive to collect cash by year-end.

2.4. Year-end cash collection and stock returns

2.4.1. Univariate portfolio sorting based on year-end cash collection

In this subsection, we provide empirical evidence on the relation
between YCC and expected returns. Table 2 shows an economically and
statistically significant return spread between the lowest and highest
YCC firms. The portfolios of firms that collect the lowest cash flows at
year-end earn 8.321% value-weighted average annual excess returns
and 11.480% equal-weighted average annual excess returns. In con-
trast, for the highest YCC portfolios, the value- and equal-weighted

Table 2
Portfolios sorted on year-end cash collection.

Equal weight
E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

Value weight
E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

L

2

3

4

H

11.480
(3.175)

12.560
(3.760)

12.596
(3.856)

13.705
(4.075)

14.576
(4.003)

L

2

3

4

H

8.321
(2.942)

8.709
(3.657)

8.633
(3.634)

9.454
(3.776)

11.740
(4.005)

H-L

3.096
(4.410)

H-L

3.419
(2.334)

The table reports the average excess returns for portfolios sorted on year-end cash
collection. The detailed definition of the year-end cash collection measure refers to
Section 2.2. The sample period is from July 1988 to December 2022. At the end of
June of each year t, we sort the sample into quintiles based on their year-end cash
collection available at the end of year t−1, in which quintile 1 (quintile 5) contains
the firms with the lowest (highest) year-end cash collection. We hold the portfolios for
one year: from July of year t until June of year t + 1. Both value- and equal-weighted
portfolio returns are reported. Newey and West (1986) robust 𝑡-statistics are reported
in parentheses. We annualize returns by multiplying by 12.

average annual returns are 11.740% and 14.576%, respectively. Over-
all, our results imply that the value- and equal-weighted return spreads
between the highest and lowest YYC firms are 3.419% and 3.096%,
respectively. These return spreads are statistically significant above 5%
level. We call the spread between the highest and lowest YCC portfolios
the year-end cash collection premium.

2.4.2. Double sorting with financial constraints

Motivated by previous empirical findings (i.e., that YCC is re-
lated to financial constraints), we sort portfolios based on YCC within
our financially constrained subsample and unconstrained subsample,
respectively. Specifically, we split our sample into financially con-
strained and unconstrained groups at the annual frequency with the
four financial constraint proxies. We then sort the firms within each
group into five portfolios based on year-end cash collection. Following
the literature, we use four proxies to measure financial constraints:
the WW index, firm size, size and age index (hereafter, SA index,
following Hadlock and Pierce, 2010), and the non-dividend payment
dummy.10

10 We first partition our sample into three groups based on the 40th and
60th percentiles of the financial constraint proxy following Whited and Wu,
2006. A firm is then classified as financially constrained if its WW index is in

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038554W. Hu et al.

Table 3
Portfolios sorted on year-end cash collection: Subsample evidence.

Panel A: Constrained Subsample

L

2

3

4

H

H-L

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

Financially constrained firms - WW index
14.242
8.211
(3.680)
(2.082)

13.704
(3.597)

11.786
(3.220)

Overall, these results demonstrate that an economically large and
statistically significant year-end cash collection premium for finan-
cially constrained firms exists. Our results are robust with value- and
equal-weighted average returns and different measures of financial
constraints.

14.990
(3.572)

6.779
(3.308)

2.5. The drivers of the YCC premium

Financially constrained firms - Total Asset

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

8.569
(2.255)

11.394
(3.181)

11.536
(3.345)

13.305
(3.558)

12.437
(3.319)

3.869
(2.700)

Financially constrained firms - SA index

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

8.164
(2.014)

9.641
(2.617)

11.195
(3.403)

10.449
(2.995)

15.229
(3.897)

7.065
(2.825)

Financially constrained firms - Non-Dividend

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

9.024
(2.115)

9.467
(2.494)

10.469
(2.756)

13.114
(3.459)

15.506
(3.435)

6.482
(2.281)

Panel B: Unconstrained Subsample

L

2

3

4

H

H-L

Financially unconstrained firms - WW index

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

8.707
(3.271)

8.059
(3.366)

8.338
(3.566)

9.923
(4.009)

10.120
(3.541)

1.412
(0.935)

Financially unconstrained firms - Total Asset

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

8.587
(3.178)

8.222
(3.410)

8.897
(3.816)

9.575
(3.878)

10.517
(3.683)

1.930
(1.320)

Financially unconstrained firms - SA index

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

8.948
(3.440)

8.419
(3.759)

8.491
(3.630)

10.368
(4.187)

10.114
(3.767)

1.166
(0.805)

Financially unconstrained firms - Dividend

E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)
(t)

8.748
(3.532)

8.280
(3.708)

8.248
(3.620)

9.369
(3.790)

9.686
(3.859)

0.938
(0.712)

The table reports the average excess returns for portfolios sorted on year-end cash
collection. The detailed definition of the year-end cash collection measure refers to
Section 2.2. The sample period is from July 1988 to December 2022. We split the
whole sample into financially constrained and unconstrained subsamples at the end of
every June, as classified by the WW index, total assets, the SA index, and the dividend
payment dummy at the end of year t−1. We then report the average value-weighted
excess return and Newey–West adjusted 𝑡-statistics for five YCC-sorted portfolios, as well
as for the long-short portfolio denoted by H-L in our constrained subsamples (Panel
A) and unconstrained subsamples (Panel B). We hold the portfolios for one year: from
July of year t until June of year t + 1. Newey and West (1986) robust 𝑡-statistics are
reported in parentheses. We annualize returns by multiplying by 12.

Table 3 reports annualized average excess stock returns across
portfolios sorted on year-end cash collection. In Panel A, firms are
financially constrained. When the financial constraint is measured by
the WW index, the average return for the highest YCC portfolio is
14.990%, whereas it is 8.211% for the lowest YCC portfolio. The
high-minus-low return spread is 6.779%, which is economically and
statistically significant at the 1% level. For robustness, we also report
the portfolio returns of financially constrained firms classified by al-
ternative measures. The high-minus-low return spreads of financially
constrained firms classified by size, SA index, and the non-dividend
payment dummy are 3.869%, 7.065%, and 6.482%, respectively.

Similarly, we report the value-weighted average portfolio returns
for unconstrained firms in Panel B. In Panel B, the high-minus-low re-
turn spreads are 1.412%, 1.930%, 1.166%, and 0.938% for financially
unconstrained firms, as measured by the WW index, size, SA index,
and our non-dividend payment dummy, respectively. The spreads are
neither economically nor statistically significant for the unconstrained
subsample with respect to all measures of financial constraints.

the top two groups, its SA index is in the top two groups, its size is in the
bottom two groups, or it does not pay dividends.

In this section, we discuss the factors driving the YCC premium.
We begin by demonstrating that the within-year spread of inventories
(INVT Q2-Q4) and total receivables (RECT Q2-Q4) are the primary
drivers of the premium. We then show that equity financing shocks
are associated with the within-year spread of inventories and total
receivables. Finally, we show that the within-year timing patterns of
INVT and RECT differ from the inventory growth spread in Belo et al.
(2019) and from the trade credits spread in Grigoris et al. (2023).

2.5.1. The components of YCC

To better understand the drivers of YCC premium, we decompose
net working capital into five components: inventories (Compustat item
INVT), total receivables (Compustat item RECT), other non-cash cur-
rent assets (Compustat item ACO), accounts payable (Compustat item
AP), and other current liabilities (Compustat item LCO). In Internet
Appendix A.1, we report each component’s average within-year spread
across five portfolios sorted on YCC in our financially constrained
subsample, as measured by the WW index.11

Panel A of Table A.1 in the Internet Appendix shows that inventories
and total receivables account for about 50.5% of the cross-sectional
variation in YCC. In addition, to test the return predictability of com-
ponent(s) of YCC, we now sort portfolios based on each component of
YCC and document their return spreads. Panel B of Table A.1 in the
Internet Appendix shows that two of our five components – the within-
year spread of inventories (INVT Q2-Q4) and total receivables (RECT
Q2-Q4) – drive YCC and the YCC premium.12

2.5.2. Equity issuance cost shocks, inventory spread, and receivable spread
In Section 2.4, we demonstrated that firms with financial constraints
have higher YCC premium. In this subsection, we provide further
support for the link between financial constraint shocks and YCC.

First, we show that average inventory spread and receivable spread
are related to financial constraints. In Table C.1 of the Internet Ap-
pendix, we demonstrate that average inventory spread and receivable
spread are higher for financially constrained firms than for uncon-
strained firms. These results confirm that the within-year spread of
inventories (INVT Q2-Q4) and total receivables (RECT Q2-Q4) drives
the difference in YCC between constrained and unconstrained firms.

Second, we show that the within-year spread of inventories and
total receivables is associated with aggregate financial shocks. To mea-
sure aggregate financial shocks, we use issuance cost shocks (ICS)
data from Belo et al. (2019). We then regress inventory spread and
receivable spread on ICS, respectively. We report our regression results
in Table C.2 of the Internet Appendix. The dependent variables in
Columns (1), (2), and (3) are YCC, inventory spread (INVT Q2-Q4), and
receivable spread (RECT Q2-Q4), respectively.13 We show that YCC,

11 For the sake of consistency, we use fiscal Q2-Q4 to denote the within-year
spread of YCC’s asset terms (i.e., inventories, total receivables and other non-
cash current assets), and use fiscal Q4-Q2 to denote the within-year spread of
YCC’s liability terms (i.e., accounts payable and other current liabilities).

12 To ensure robustness, we also provide an alternative measure of YCC—
YCCclean. This measure excludes the alternative roles of NWC that may
contaminate our results. We report our results in Table A.2 in Internet
Appendix A.3

13 Following Massa et al. (2015), we control for a list of variables related to
earnings management: book-to-market ratio, financial leverage, the logarithm
of annual stock returns, return volatility and illiquidity from Amihud (2002).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038555W. Hu et al.

inventory spread, and receivable spread are negatively associated with
ICS; that is, firms collect more cash flows by year-end when it is more
costly to issue equity (low ICS).

Overall, these results demonstrate that the within-year spread of
inventories and receivables is related to financial constraints and finan-
cial constraint shocks.

2.5.3. The YCC premium versus growth effect and counterparty risk pre-
mium

One possible concern is that the YCC premium can be simply driven
by growth effects, such as the asset growth effect (Cooper et al., 2008)
and the inventory growth effect (Belo and Lin, 2012), both of which
are closely related to YCC and negatively predict stock returns. Thus, it
is important to differentiate YCC from inventory growth (IG hereafter)
and asset growth (AG hereafter).

i,t −ATQ4

i,t −INVTQ4

i,t−1) and assets (ATQ4

By definition, IG and AG are measured at different frequencies com-
pared to YCC. Specifically, IG and AG measure the annual growth of
inventories (INVTQ4
i,t−1), respectively.
Different from YCC, IG and AG do not include information on early-
year decisions (i.e., decisions by fiscal 𝑄2). If the YCC measured with
a quarterly frequency (Q2 − Q4) is simply driven by growth effects
measured with a yearly frequency, we should then expect the other
decreases in NWC within a year to also predict future returns (e.g., Q1-
Q2, Q3-Q4). Panel A of Table C.3 in the Internet Appendix shows that
the return spread is statistically significant when we sort portfolios
based on the difference in NWC between the first half of the year and
the second half of the year. However, the return spread diminishes if
we sort portfolios based on other changes in NWC (i.e., Q3 - Q4 and Q1
- Q2.14). Therefore, we conclude that the return predictability of YCC
is not simply driven by growth effects.

NWCQ2
i,t
ATQ2
i,t

which is measured as

To ensure robustness, we also propose a new measure: YCCnew,
NWCQ4
i,t
ATQ4
i,t
decrease in the proportion of net working capital from fiscal Q2 to fiscal
Q4, but is no longer negatively related to asset growth.15 Table C.4 of
the Internet Appendix shows that this new measure of YCC positively
predicts future returns very well.

. This new measure captures the

−

In addition, the literature suggests that IG contains information
about business cycles (Belo and Lin, 2012) while account receivables
contain information about production network risks. However, we
show that YCC contains information about financing frictions. Thus,
our task is to examine whether a firm’s exposure to aggregate finan-
cial shocks also helps explain the cross-sectional variation in average
returns of portfolios sorted by IG and R/S. Panel A of Table C.5 in
the Internet Appendix reports risk characteristics for the five portfolios
sorted on IG. We show that the sensitivities to ICS between the highest
and the lowest IG quintile portfolios are not statistically different, with
a t-statistic of 1.34. Panel B of Table C.5 in the Internet Appendix
shows that the counterparty risks cannot be explained by aggregate
financial shocks because the sensitivities to ICS between the highest and
the lowest R/S quintile portfolios are not statistically different, with a
t-statistic of 1.38. Our results suggest that IG and R/S do not likely
contain information about financial cost shocks.

To further confirm the novelty of the YCC premium, we examine
whether the YCC premium still exists after we control for IG or R/S. To

14 Due to the persistence of cash flow, the return spread is also statistically
significant when we sort portfolios based on first half of the year - fiscal Q3.
15 The level of NWC has a positive relationship with total assets since NWC
serves as a nontrivial component of total assets. However, YCCnew focuses
on the proportions of NWC. Mathematically, YCCnew can be expressed as
(NWCQ2
i,t , in which NWC in fiscal Q4 is deflated to
eliminate the impact of asset growth. Empirically, there is no significant
difference in average annual asset growth between the lowest YCCnew-sorted
portfolio (0.140) and the highest YCCnew-sorted portfolio (0.146).

i,t )∕ATQ2

1
i,t ∕ATQ2

NWCQ4

i,t −

ATQ4

i,t

do so, we implement double-sort analyses. We first control for IG and
construct the YCC spread within each IG-sorted portfolio. Our results
when we control for IG are reported in Panel A of Table C.6 in the
Internet Appendix. We show that YCC spreads are 7.91% and 6.06% per
year among medium and high IG firms, respectively. The YCC spreads
within these two IG-sorted portfolios are significant at the 1% level, and
the joint test suggests that the average YCC spread of all IG portfolios is
significantly positive at the 1% level. In Panel B, the joint test suggests
that the average IG spread in our sample is not significant.

We then control for R/S and construct the YCC spread within each
R/S-sorted portfolio. Panel A of Table C.7 in the Internet Appendix
shows that the YCC spread is 5.97% and 9.59% in low and high R/S-
sorted groups, respectively; both results are significant above 5% level.
Moreover, the YCC spread is jointly significant across the three R/S-
sorted portfolios, with a 𝑝-value of less than 0.01. However, Panel B
of Table C.7 in the Internet Appendix shows that the counterparty
premium in our sample is insignificant in all YCC-sorted portfolios. Our
findings suggest that the YCC premium cannot be explained by IG and
R/S effects.

Finally, as introduced in Internet Appendix A.1, within-year spread
of inventories and receivables are main drivers of the YCC premium.
Therefore, we further investigate the extent to which the variation in
the average returns of the YCC-sorted portfolios can be explained by
the IG premium in Belo and Lin (2012), as well as by the counterparty
premium in Grigoris et al. (2023); to do so, we perform standard asset
pricing tests. Specifically, we run time-series regressions of YCC-sorted
portfolios’ excess returns on the (Fama and French, 2015) five-factor
model, the average returns of the long-short portfolio sorted on IG,
and the average returns of the long-short portfolio sorted on R/S. As
shown in Table C.8 of the Internet Appendix, the risk-adjusted return
(intercept) of the YCC-sorted high-minus-low portfolio remains large
and statistically significant at the 1% level. Additionally, the alpha in
this model remains comparable to the YCC spread (i.e., the return on
the high-minus-low portfolio) in our univariate sorting (Table 3). In
sum, our results from asset pricing tests in Table C.8 of the Internet
Appendix suggest that the cross-sectional return spread across portfo-
lios sorted on YCC cannot be explained by either the IG premium or
counterparty premium.

3. Dynamic investment-based model

To rationalize our empirical findings in Section 2, we build a
dynamic structural model of investment, cash holdings, cash collection,
and firm financing at a semiannual frequency.

We first specify a firm’s production and capital investment pro-
cesses. Next, we discuss the timing of cash collection and compare
the definitions of earnings and cash flows. We then introduce the link
between cash collection and equity financing costs. Finally, we discuss
the firm’s problem and asset pricing implications.

3.1. Production

Firms use physical capital (𝐾𝑡) to produce output (𝛱𝑡). For brevity’s
sake, we omit firm index 𝑖 whenever possible. The production function
is given by:

𝛱𝑡 = 𝑒𝑧𝑡+𝑥𝑡 𝐾 𝛼
𝑡 ,

(2)

in which 𝑧𝑡 and 𝑥𝑡 are the level of the firm’s idiosyncratic and aggregate
productivity, respectively. The term 𝐾𝑡 is physical capital, and 𝛼 ∈
(0, 1) captures a decreasing returns-to-scale technology. Following Lin
and Zhang (2013), the level of the firm’s productivity is the sum of
an idiosyncratic shock 𝑧𝑡, and an aggregate shock 𝑥𝑡, and both the
idiosyncratic shock 𝑧𝑡 and aggregate shock 𝑥𝑡 follow an AR(1) process:

𝑧𝑡+1 = 𝜌𝑧𝑧𝑡 + 𝜖𝑧,𝑡+1,

(3)

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038556W. Hu et al.

𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝑥(1 − 𝜌𝑥) + 𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑡 + 𝜖𝑥,𝑡+1,

(4)

in which 𝜖𝑧,𝑡+1 and 𝜖𝑥,𝑡+1 are firm-specific and aggregate productivity
shocks, respectively. They are normally distributed with a zero mean
and standard deviation 𝜎𝑧 and 𝜎𝑥. 𝜌𝑧 and 𝜌𝑥 are the autocorrelation
of firm-specific and aggregate productivity shocks, respectively, and 𝑥
is the long-run average aggregate productivity, which determines the
long-run average scale of the economy.16

Physical capital evolves according to the standard law of motion:

𝐾𝑡+1 = 𝐼𝑡 + (1 − 𝛿)𝐾𝑡,

(5)

in which 𝐼𝑡 represents investment, and 𝛿 denotes the depreciation rate
of physical capital. A firm’s purchase or sale of capital incurs convex
adjustment costs, given by:

𝜙(𝐼𝑡, 𝐾𝑡) =

𝑔𝐼 2
𝑡
2𝐾𝑡

,

(6)

in which 𝑔 determines the slope of the marginal adjustment cost and is
greater than zero.

3.2. Demand for cash flow payments

In the model, products can be transferred into paid revenue or

unpaid revenue:

𝛱𝑡 = 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡
⏟⏟⏟
Paid revenue

,

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑡)𝛱𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
Unpaid revenue

(7)

in which 𝜆𝑡 is the proportion of products paid with cash at time 𝑡,
which ranges from 0 to 1. 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡 is the paid revenue, which can generate
immediate payments. To obtain revenue in cash immediately, firms
(suppliers) must offer a discounted price 𝑝𝑑 to customers. We note that
𝑝𝑑 should be smaller than 1
; otherwise, customers have no incentive
1+𝑟𝑓
to pay in cash immediately. (1 − 𝜆𝑡)𝛱𝑡 is the revenue that is not paid
at time 𝑡 but will be collected in the next period. In our model, the
unpaid revenue at time 𝑡 can be considered net working capital in the
form of accounts receivable or inventories.17 Thus, according to cash
flow-based accounting, a firm’s operating cash flows (OCF) at time 𝑡
are:18

OCF𝑡 = (1 − 𝜏)[(1 − 𝜆𝑡−1)𝛱𝑡−1 + 𝑝𝑑 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡 − 𝑓 + 𝑟𝑠𝐿𝑡] + 𝜏𝛿𝐾𝑡.

(8)

In our model, the definition of OCF can be clearly mapped to
accounting definitions which we discuss in detail in Internet Appendix
A.2. According to the definition, OCF contains unpaid revenue at time
𝑡−1, (1−𝜆𝑡−1)𝛱𝑡−1, and paid revenue at time 𝑡, 𝑝𝑑 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡. 𝑓 is the operating
cost, and 𝑟𝑠𝐿𝑡 is the interest from saving cash 𝐿𝑡. 𝑟𝑠 is the cash saving
rate. Following the literature, we assume 𝑟𝑠 = 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜅, in which 𝜅 is
the constant wedge between the risk-free and saving rates. 𝜅 is greater
than zero, such that cash holdings are costly to firms (i.e., 𝑟𝑠 < 𝑟𝑓 );
otherwise, firms with financial frictions would strictly prefer to reinvest
profits in cash assets. The last term, 𝜏𝛿𝐾𝑡, is the tax deduction of
depreciation.

16 We set 𝑥 such that the long-term average capital stock is normalized to
be 1, which is standard in the literature (Boldrin et al., 2001; Zhang, 2005).
17 It is unrealistic to incorporate all sources of NWC in one model because
of the complexity of NWC. In this framework, we only attempt to integrate
accounts receivable and inventories consistently for the sake of simplicity,
since these two components drive our main results.

18 U.S. GAAP requires that firms classify interest paid and interest received

as operating cash flows.

According to accrual-based accounting, a firm’s earnings at time t

are:19

Earnings𝑡 = (1 − 𝜏)[(1 − 𝜆𝑡)𝛱𝑡 + 𝑝𝑑 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡 − 𝑓 + 𝑟𝑠𝐿𝑡] + 𝜏𝛿𝐾𝑡.

(9)

Earnings are defined as the sum of operating cash flows (OCF) and
revenue accruals.20 (1−𝜆𝑡)𝛱𝑡 +𝑝𝑑 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡 is the gross profit at time t. Other
items are the same as those in the OCF equation.

3.3. Payout, monitoring, and financing

A firm must finance its capital investment, adjustment costs, and
cash reserves with cash, cash flow, and equity financing. The firm’s
budget constraint can be written as:

𝐸𝑡 = OCF𝑡 − 𝐼𝑡 − 𝜙𝑡 − (𝐿𝑡+1 − 𝐿𝑡).

(10)

The first term is the operating cash flow defined in Eq. (8). 𝐼𝑡 and 𝜙𝑡
are the investment in physical capital and incurred capital adjustment
costs, respectively. The last term 𝐿𝑡+1 − 𝐿𝑡 represents the investment
in cash holdings at time t. The firm’s cash holdings are subject to
non-negative constraint, 𝐿𝑡+1

≥ 0.

𝑡

,

(11)

𝜆 (1 − 𝜆𝑡)]𝐸𝑡}𝜉−𝑎2

If 𝐸𝑡 is greater than zero, then the firm pays out; if 𝐸𝑡 is smaller
than zero, then the firm raises external financing, which is more costly
than cash financing. In particular, we assume that equity issuance costs
take the following form:
𝛹 (𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡) = 1𝐸𝑡<0{𝑎0𝐾𝑡 − [𝑎1 + 𝑎𝑠𝑡
in which 1𝐸𝑡<0 is an indicator function that is one if 𝐸𝑡 is smaller than
zero, suggesting that the firm issues equity. 𝑎0 captures the fixed cost of
accessing the market. 𝑎1 is the constant linear cost of equity issuance.
We then assume that agency costs are determined by two components:
(i) the proportion of unpaid revenue and (ii) monitors’ attention. The
literature suggests that unpaid revenue increases information asymme-
try (Iliev, 2010; Massa et al., 2015; Fang et al., 2016) and results in
higher financing costs. In addition, monitors’ attention to cash flow
payments within a fiscal year is asymmetric. According to the literature,
monitors pay greater attention to fiscal year-end performance (Brown
and Pinello, 2007; Fan et al., 2010; Frankel et al., 2017). To model the
timing patterns, we consider a deterministic regime shift in 𝑎𝑠𝑡
𝜆 between
𝜆 in the first half of the year and 𝑎𝐻
two different states (𝑠𝑡 ∈ {𝐿, 𝐻}): 𝑎𝐿
𝜆
in the second half of the year, in which 0 < 𝑎𝐿
𝜆 . For each state, it
switches to the other in the next period. These findings, taken together,
indicate that the agency cost is 𝑎𝑠𝑡
𝜆 (1 − 𝜆𝑡)𝐸𝑡. Following Belo et al.
(2019), the financing cost is also affected by the aggregate financial
shock 𝜉𝑡 and the issuance cost sensitivity 𝑎2. The aggregate financial
shock follows an AR(1) process:

𝜆 < 𝑎𝐻

ln(𝜉𝑡+1) = (1 − 𝜌𝜉) ̄𝜉 + 𝜌𝜉 ln(𝜉𝑡) + 𝜖𝜉,𝑡+1.

(12)

We assume that the unconditional expectation of the aggregate
financial shock is one.21 𝜖𝜉,𝑡+1 is the aggregate shock to the financing

19 The specific fraction of accounts receivable or inventories held has no
impact on earnings. This inference relies on an implied assumption that there
is no difference in the value between one unit of accounts receivable and one
unit of inventories. We acknowledge that accounts receivable and inventories
are different in many ways. For example, accounts receivable suffer from
default problems, while inventories usually depreciate over time. However, the
literature on revenue accruals generally does not distinguish between accounts
receivable and inventories (Sloan, 1996; Dechow and Dichev, 2002). In our
paper, we find it unnecessary to take the trade-off between accounts receivable
and inventories into account since we hope to focus on the exact same role that
accounts receivable and inventories play—that is, serving as a component of
revenue accruals. Differentiating between accounts receivable and inventories
clearly has no benefits in our model but increases the computational burden.
20 See the detailed definition of revenue accruals in Internet Appendix A.2.
21 Under the restriction that the unconditional expectation of the aggregate
financial shock equals one, E(𝜉𝑡+1) = 1, we have E(ln(𝜉𝑡+1)) = − 1
𝑉 𝑎𝑟(ln 𝜉𝑡+1).
Thus, ̄𝜉 ≡ E(ln(𝜉𝑡+1)) = − 1

).

(

2

𝜎2
𝜉
1−𝜌2
𝜉

2

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038557W. Hu et al.

cost, which is normally distributed with a zero mean and standard
deviation 𝜎𝜉 .

Finally, the effective cash flow 𝐷𝑡 distributed to shareholders is

given by:

𝐷𝑡 = 𝐸𝑡 − 𝛹 (𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡).

(13)

Year-end cash collection behavior

Assuming that 𝑡 denotes the first half of a given year and 𝑡+1 denotes
the second half, the year-end cash collection behavior can be expressed
as the difference in unpaid revenue between the first and second half of
the year, (1−𝜏)((1−𝜆𝑡)𝛱𝑡 −(1−𝜆𝑡+1)𝛱𝑡+1). Because year-end attention is
higher than attention at the beginning of the year, firms have a greater
incentive to decrease their working capital by offering less trade credit
to customers at year-end compared to the beginning of the year. If a
firm collects more cash flows at year-end, then the year-end collection
is larger than 0 ((1 − 𝜏)((1 − 𝜆𝑡)𝛱𝑡 − (1 − 𝜆𝑡+1)𝛱𝑡+1) > 0). Higher year-end
collection suggests that more cash payments are collected by year-end.

3.4. Firm’s problem

A firm takes the stochastic discount factor (SDF) to value cash flows
in period 𝑡 + 1, 𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1 as given, and we specify SDF as a function of the
two aggregate shocks:

𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1 =

1
1 + 𝑟𝑓

exp(−𝛾𝑥𝛥 ln(𝑥𝑡+1) − 𝛾𝜉𝛥 ln(𝜉𝑡+1))
𝑡[exp(−𝛾𝑥𝛥 ln(𝑥𝑡+1) − 𝛾𝜉𝛥 ln(𝜉𝑡+1))]

E

.

(14)

in which 𝛾𝑥 and 𝛾𝜉 are the market price of risk parameters with a
positive sign, meaning that a negative shock from productivity (lower
𝑥𝑡+1) or financing costs (lower 𝜉𝑡+1) results in higher marginal utility.
We note that we have normalized the SDF so that the risk-free rate is
always equal to 𝑟𝑓 .

We define 𝑉𝑡(𝑧𝑡, 𝜉𝑡, 𝑠𝑡, 𝐾𝑡, 𝐿𝑡, 𝜆𝑡−1, 𝛱𝑡−1) as the cum-dividend mar-
ket value. Firms solve the maximization problem by making capital
investment, cash savings, and cash collection decisions:

𝑉𝑡(𝑥𝑡, 𝜉𝑡, 𝑧𝑡, 𝑠𝑡, 𝐾𝑡, 𝐿𝑡, 𝜆𝑡−1, 𝛱𝑡−1)

(15)

=

max
𝐾𝑡+1,𝐿𝑡+1,𝜆𝑡

𝐷𝑡 + E

𝑡[𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1𝑉𝑡+1(𝑥𝑡+1, 𝜉𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1, 𝑧𝑡+1, 𝐾𝑡+1, 𝐿𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡, 𝛱𝑡)].

Appendix A reports the detailed procedure we use to solve the
model via value function iteration. In the following subsections, we
solve the firm’s optimal cash collection (Section 3.4.1) and cash savings
(Section 3.4.2) policies and give our intuition behind them.

3.4.1. Optimal cash payment and the timing patterns

The optimal interior solution with respect to cash payment (𝜆𝑡) is:

(1 − 𝜏)𝑝𝑑 𝛱𝑡 −

𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡)
𝜕𝜆𝑡

(

[

= E
𝑡

𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1

(1 − 𝜏)𝛱𝑡 +

)]

,

(16)

𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1)
𝜕𝜆𝑡
𝜆 𝐸𝑡 − [𝑎1 + 𝑎𝑠𝑡

,

𝜆

in which

𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡,𝜆𝑡,𝑠𝑡)
𝜕𝜆𝑡

𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡+1,𝜆𝑡+1,𝑠𝑡+1)
𝜕𝜆𝑡

(1 − 𝜆𝑡+1)](1 − 𝜏)𝛱𝑡}𝜉−𝑎2

= 1𝐸𝑡<0{𝑎𝑠𝑡
= 1𝐸𝑡+1<0{[𝑎1 + 𝑎𝑠𝑡+1

𝜆 (1 − 𝜆𝑡)](1 − 𝜏)𝑝𝑑 𝛱𝑡}𝜉−𝑎2
𝑡
𝑡+1 . The
and
Euler equation sets the marginal benefit of increasing cash payments
at time 𝑡 equal to the expected marginal discounted cost of increasing
cash payments. The left-hand side of Eq. (16) is the marginal benefit of
increasing one unit percentage of 𝜆𝑡 at time 𝑡, which can be interpreted
as the marginal increase in payouts (i.e., (1 − 𝜏)𝑝𝑑 𝛱𝑡) plus the marginal
decrease in financing costs (i.e., − 𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡,𝜆𝑡)
), which is caused by higher
information transparency and lower external financing. The right-hand
side of Eq. (16) is the expected marginal cost of increasing one unit of
𝜆𝑡 at time t, including the expected marginal decrease in the dividend
payment and the increase in future equity issuance costs.

𝜕𝜆𝑡

A firm’s cash collection decision is determined by the discount
cost and external financing costs. First, a firm with a high discount
cost (low 𝑝𝑑 ) has less of an incentive to collect cash because it is

less likely to offer costly discounted prices to its customers, all else
equal. Second, a firm’s cash collection can also be decided through the
external financing channel. The more external financing there is, the
more beneficial increasing cash payments would become. As a result,
firms with more external financing tend to collect more cash flows at
time 𝑡 to substitute for external financing. In addition, increasing 𝜆𝑡
means that fewer earnings are carried over to the next period, which
results in lower cash flows and higher expected financing costs at time
𝑡 + 1. Collectively, all else equal, firms with higher current financing
needs tend to increase 𝜆𝑡 to lower their external financing costs. This
increase in 𝜆𝑡 continues until the marginal value equals the expected
marginal cost of increasing one unit percentage of 𝜆𝑡.

Furthermore, the external financing channel drives the year-end
cash collection in our model. Specifically, when a firm is more disci-
plined (i.e., at the end of the year), it is more inclined to increase cash
payments because the marginal benefits of increasing 𝜆 are high (𝑎𝑠𝑡
𝜆 =
𝑎𝐻
𝜆 )), whereas the marginal costs of increasing 𝜆 are low. However,
those related benefits and costs are totally reversed in the next period,
resulting in a higher ratio of unpaid revenue at the beginning of the
year. In Section 3.4.2, we explore more deeply the relationship between
the year-end cash collection decision, the cash decision, and financial
constraints.

3.4.2. Optimal cash holdings

In this section, we discuss the optimal cash policy by analyzing
the first-order condition of cash holdings. We then introduce two
channels that affect the marginal value of cash. Finally, we establish
the relationship between financial constraints and the marginal value of
cash. Given the firm’s optimization problem, the interior optimal cash
policy should satisfy the following condition:

1 − 𝛹 ′
𝐸𝑡

(𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡) = E

𝑡

[
𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1(1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠)(1 − 𝛹 ′

𝐸𝑡+1

]
(𝐸𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1))

.

(17)

The left-hand side of the equation is the marginal cost of increasing
one unit of cash, the forgone dividend, and the marginal financing cost
at time 𝑡. The right-hand side of the equation is the marginal benefit of
increasing one unit of cash at time 𝑡 + 1: the taxed interest rate plus the
expected marginal reduction in the equity issuance cost.

Cash savings and aggregate risk

We can rewrite the right-hand side of Eq. (17) as

[

E
𝑡

𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1(1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠)(1 − 𝛹 ′

𝐸𝑡+1

]
(𝐸𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1))

(18)

= (1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠){(1 − E
+ 𝐶𝑜𝑣(𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1, −𝛹 ′

𝐸𝑡+1

𝑡[𝛹 ′

𝐸𝑡+1

(𝐸𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1))}.

(𝐸𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1)])∕(1 + 𝑟𝑓 )

According to Riddick and Whited (2009) and Eisfeldt and Rampini
(2009), under risk-neutrality, the covariance term disappears from Eq. (18),
and risk plays no role in determining the firm’s optimal savings policy:

1 − 𝛹 ′
𝐸𝑡

(𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡) =

1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠
1 + 𝑟𝑓

(1 − E

𝑡[𝛹 ′

𝐸𝑡+1

(𝐸𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1)]).

This equation highlights several aspects of our intuition. First, cash
derives value because it serves as an alternative to costly external
financing and thus provides more financial flexibility in the future.
Indeed, a firm optimally holds no cash if external financing is free.
Second, the term (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠 < 𝑟𝑓 indicates that carrying cash holdings
is costly for a firm because the interest is taxed and the interest rate is
also lower than the risk-free rate. Thus, an optimal interior cash policy
balances the flexibility benefit with the carrying cost.

However, in our model, the marginal value of cash is decided by
two effects: the precautionary motive and risk consideration. First, the
precautionary motive is reflected by the expected marginal financing
costs, −E
(𝐸𝑡+1, 𝜆𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1)], in Eq. (18). Specifically, firms with

𝑡[𝛹 ′

𝐸𝑡+1

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038558W. Hu et al.

higher expected marginal financing costs would undertake more financ-
ing costs in the future and thus would hold more cash to alleviate future
financial difficulties. Second, the risk consideration is represented by
the positive covariance term in Eq. (18). When the aggregate finan-
cial shock is positively priced, firms will save more cash because the
expected marginal financing costs covary positively with the discount
factor. In detail, a negative aggregate financial shock would result in
higher expected marginal financing costs and a higher discount factor.
In our model, due to the covariance term, financially constrained firms
measured with the marginal value of cash would suffer more from
aggregate financial shocks than in the risk-neutrality model and thus
would save more cash.

Marginal value of cash and financial constraints

Following Bolton et al. (2011), the marginal value of cash is gener-
ally interpreted as capturing how financially constrained a firm is. The
intuition is that cash is valuable for constrained firms. Firms respond to
financial constraints by optimally managing their cash holdings so as to
avoid situations of financial distress. According to Bolton et al. (2011),
if the marginal value of cash is equal to or less than one, then a firm
does not suffer from financial friction and thus is considered financially
unconstrained. However, if the marginal value of cash is greater than
one, then the firm has difficulties obtaining funds because of the
external financing costs. For interior solutions, the marginal value of
cash is equal to 1 − 𝛹 ′
,22
which implies that in our model, financially constrained firms defined
by the marginal value of cash must pursue external financing (𝐸𝑡 < 0)
for interior solutions.

𝐸 (𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡) = 1 − 1𝐸𝑡<0{−[𝑎1 + 𝑎𝑠𝑡

𝜆 (1 − 𝜆𝑡)]}𝜉−𝑎2

𝑡

3.4.3. Financial constraints, year-end cash collection, and cash holdings

This section discusses three important implications of the relation-
ship between financial constraints, year-end cash collection, and cash
holdings.

Year-end cash collection and cash timing patterns

We find that year-end cash collection drives cash timing patterns. To
explore this relationship, we combine Eq. (16) and Eq. (17) as follows:

Financial constraints and year-end cash collection

Additionally, there is a positive relationship between year-end cash
collection and financial constraints. For the interior solutions with
respect to cash holdings, if 𝐸𝑡 < 0, then the firm is regarded as
financially constrained because its marginal value of cash is greater
than one. Because of its current financing needs (𝐸𝑡 < 0) and potential
future financial frictions indicated by its high marginal value of cash, a
financially constrained firm is more affected by the external financing
channel. In particular, financially constrained firms are more likely
to pursue external financing, which activates the terms
and
𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡+1,𝜆𝑡+1,𝑠𝑡+1)
in Eq. (16). Therefore, they are more affected by regime-
𝜕𝜆𝑡
shifting attention (𝑎𝑠𝑡
𝜆 ), which drives year-end cash collection. However,
≥ 0, then the firm is considered to be financially unconstrained.
if 𝐸𝑡
It does not have many financing needs – either currently or in the near
future – and thus is less affected by the external financing channel.

𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡,𝜆𝑡,𝑠𝑡)
𝜕𝜆𝑡

Year-end cash collection and cash savings

Finally, we can observe a positive relationship between year-end
cash collection and cash savings for two reasons. First, as we discussed
earlier, year-end cash collection and cash savings are both positively
affected by financial constraints. Second, high year-end cash collection
results in more external financing in the future (lower 𝐸𝑡+1), which fur-
ther contributes to expected marginal financing costs and the positive
covariance term in Eq. (18).

3.5. Asset pricing implications

In the model, firms make optimal capital investment, cash holdings,
and cash collection decisions. Risk and expected stock returns are
determined endogenously. To make the link explicitly, we can evaluate
the value function in Eq. (15) at the optimum and obtain:

𝑉𝑡 = 𝐷𝑡 + E

𝑡[𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1𝑉𝑡+1] ⇒ 0 = E

𝑡[𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1𝑟𝑒

𝑡+1],

(20)

in which 𝑟𝑒
With some algebra, Eq. (20) can be rewritten as:

𝑡+1 is the stock excess return, equaling 𝑉𝑡+1∕[𝑉𝑡 −𝐷𝑡]−(1+𝑟𝑓 ).

𝑝𝑑 −

𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡)
𝜕𝜆𝑡

∕[(1 − 𝜏)𝛱𝑡]

E

(19)

𝑡[𝑟𝑒

𝑡+1] = 𝛾𝑥 × 𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑟𝑒
= 𝛽𝑥,𝑡𝛾𝑥𝜎2

𝑥 + 𝛽𝜉,𝑡𝛾𝜉𝜎2
𝜉 .

𝑡+1, 𝛥 ln(𝑥𝑡+1)) + 𝛾𝜉 × 𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑟𝑒

𝑡+1, 𝛥 ln(𝜉𝑡+1))

(21)

=

− 𝛹 ′
𝐸𝑡

(𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡)∕[1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠].

1
1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠
The left- and right-hand sides of Eq. (19) are the standardized
forms of the left-hand sides of Eq. (16) and Eq. (17), respectively.23
Despite the change in magnitude, we still recognize the left-hand side
of Eq. (19) as the marginal cost of increasing unpaid revenue and
the right-hand side of Eq. (19) as the marginal cost of holding cash.
This equation shows that a firm faces a trade-off between choosing to
hold cash or increasing unpaid revenue. Such a firm would adjust the
amount of unpaid revenue until the cost of holding unpaid revenue is
equal to the cost of holding cash; as a result, year-end cash collection
can result in cash timing patterns. In particular, when the cost of
increasing unpaid revenue is low at the beginning of the year, the firm
would be more likely to substitute unpaid revenue for cash holdings.
In contrast, at year-end when the cost of increasing unpaid revenue is
high, then the firm tends to substitute cash holdings for unpaid revenue.
In other words, unpaid revenue and cash are substitutes, since both
serve as a buffer against future cash flow shortfalls and thus increase
future financial flexibility.

22 We compute the expectation and derivative numerically for a few corner

solutions since the first-order condition does not hold.
23 𝑝𝑑 − 𝜕𝛹 (𝐸𝑡,𝜆𝑡,𝑠𝑡)
(1 − 𝜏)𝛱𝑡.
divided by 1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠. Both are equal to
𝜆𝑡+1)]}𝜉−𝑎2

𝜕𝜆𝑡
1
1+(1−𝜏)𝑟𝑠

∕[(1 − 𝜏)𝛱𝑡] is the left-hand side of Eq. (16) divided by
− 𝛹 ′
(𝐸𝑡, 𝜆𝑡, 𝑠𝑡)∕[1 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑟𝑠] is the left-hand side of Eq. (17)
𝐸𝑡

𝑡[𝑀𝑡,𝑡+11𝐸𝑡+1<0{−[𝑎1 + 𝑎𝑠𝑡+1

1
1+𝑟𝑓

− E

(1 −

𝜆

𝑡+1 ] .

The equilibrium risk premiums in the model are determined by the
endogenous covariances of a firm’s excess stock returns with the two ag-
gregate shocks (quantity of risk) and by the market price of the two risk
parameters (𝛾𝑥 and 𝛾𝜉) in Eq. (14). The pre-specified positive sign of the
market prices of risk implies that, all else equal, assets with returns that
have a more positive covariance with the aggregate productivity shock
are riskier and offer higher average returns in equilibrium. Similarly,
all else equal, assets with returns that have a more positive covariance
with the aggregate financial shock are riskier and offer higher average
returns in equilibrium. In Section 3.6, we explain in detail the economic
mechanism driving the YCC premium.

3.6. The mechanism

To explain the sign of the year-end cash collection premium in the
model, we then describe how each of the priced shocks, 𝜖𝑥 and 𝜖𝜉,
respectively, contributes to the spread.

3.6.1. The contribution of 𝜖𝑥

As we discussed earlier, the risk exposure to aggregate productivity
shocks is affected by sales paid with cash, 𝑝𝑑 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡. As a result, all else
equal, firms that collect more cash flows (higher 𝜆) at year-end are
more exposed to aggregate productivity shocks. That is, the increase
in aggregate productivity (𝜖𝑥 > 0) has a larger percentage of positive
change on the operating cash flows of the high YCC firm relative to the
low YCC firm. Therefore, 𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

> 0.

> 𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑥,𝑡

𝑥,𝑡

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038559W. Hu et al.

3.6.2. The contribution of 𝜖𝜉

The risk exposure to aggregate financial shocks is largely deter-
mined by the extent of external financing. Firms with high year-end
cash collection do not carry over much of their earnings to the next
period, resulting in more external financing (lower 𝐸𝑡+1). However,
firms with low year-end cash collection have more cash flows in the
next period and thus a low need for equity issuance. If there is a
negative financial shock on all firms (𝜖𝜉 < 0), then high YCC firms
would be more negatively affected since they are more likely to pay the
costs of accessing the equity market, implying 𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ
>
0.

> 𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=𝐿𝑜𝑤

𝜉,𝑡

𝜉,𝑡

These findings, taken together, indicate that according to Eq. (21),
the risk premium between the high and low year-end cash collection
portfolio is:

𝑡+1]𝑌 𝐶𝐶=ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ − E

𝑡[𝑟𝑒
E
= (𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ
𝑥,𝑡

𝑡+1]𝑌 𝐶𝐶=𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑡[𝑟𝑒
− 𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=𝐿𝑜𝑤
𝛾𝑥𝜎2
)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
(+)

𝑥,𝑡

𝜉,𝑡

𝑥 + (𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

− 𝛽𝑌 𝐶𝐶=𝐿𝑜𝑤
)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
(+)

𝜉,𝑡

(22)

𝛾𝜉𝜎2
𝜉 .

In sum, the risk premium is positive.

4. Quantitative model implications

In this section, we calibrate our model parameters and solve the
model numerically. We then investigate the model’s quantitative pre-
dictions and discuss the targeted moments. Finally, we examine the
mechanisms of the YCC premium.

4.1. Calibration

Table 4 shows the calibration of our model parameters. We care-
fully discuss the aggregate and firm-level moments targeted by our
calibration. To quantitatively evaluate the calibration of the model pa-
rameters, we compare a wide set of targeted moments and nontargeted
moments with those in the data in Table 5. To obtain the model-implied
moments, we simulate the policy path for 5000 firms with different
productivity shock paths for 1200 periods (600 years) at a semiannual
frequency. We then drop the first 1000 periods to neutralize the impact
of the initial condition, and we treat the remaining simulated data for
200 periods similarly to those from the economy’s stationary distri-
bution. Finally, we simulate 25 samples and report our cross-sample
average results as model moments. Panel A of Table 5 reports targeted
moments in both the data and the model.

Firm’s technology: general parameters. We set the curvature of
the production function 𝛼 to be 0.58, close to Cooper and Haltiwanger
(2006). The semiannual depreciation rate, 𝛿, is set to be 0.01 × 6, as
in Bloom (2009). We set the corporate tax rate to be 0.35, consistent
with Hennessy and Whited (2005, 2007).

Firm’s technology: costs. We calibrate the quadratic capital adjust-
ment cost, 𝑔, to be 0.26, so as to match the volatility and interdecile
range of firm-level investment rates (0.17 and 0.34 in the data; 0.14 and
0.26 in the model).24 The assumed operating cost largely determines
firms’ cash flows. Thus, we set 𝑓 to be 0.05, which implies an average
ratio of cash flows to assets of 0.17, close to the data at 0.16. We set
the traditional equity issuance cost parameters to be 𝑎0 = 0.01 and 𝑎1 =
0.06, which imply that the average fraction of equity issuance is 23%
(22% in the data) and that the mean of the firm-level issuance-to-asset

24 The interdecile range of investment rates is a moment that measures
the level of investment spikes. According to Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006),
quadratic adjustment costs play an important role in decreasing investment
spikes. For example, if a sample of firms has high investment volatility but low
investment spikes, then these firms are assumed to face large adjustment costs,
which prevent them from adjusting capital significantly. Thus, we include this
moment as a target to calibrate capital adjustment costs.

Table 4
Calibration.

Parameters

Technology
Returns to scale
Corporate tax rate
Rate of depreciation for capital
Quadratic capital adjustment cost
Operating cost
Fixed financing cost
Linear financing cost
Issuance cost sensitivity
Agency cost high
Agency cost low
Discounted price
Carrying cost
Stochastic process
Persistence of idiosyncratic productivity shock
STD of idiosyncratic productivity shock
Persistence of aggregate productivity shock
STD of aggregate productivity shock
Persistence of aggregate financial shock
STD of aggregate financial shock
SDF
Semiannual risk free rate
Risk aversion to productivity shock
Risk aversion to financing shock

Symbol

Value

𝛼
𝜏
𝛿
𝑔
𝑓
𝑎0 × 10
𝑎1
𝑎2
𝑎𝐻
𝜆
𝑎𝐿
𝜆
𝑝𝑑
𝜅

𝜌𝑧
𝜎𝑧
𝜌𝑥
𝜎𝑥
𝜌𝜉
𝜎𝜉

𝑟𝑓
𝛾𝑥
𝛾𝜉

0.58
0.35
0.06
0.26
0.05
0.01
0.06
10.00
0.29
0.05
0.95
0.016/2

0.81
0.20
0.88
0.07
0.87
0.04

2.1%/2
6
16

This table presents the calibrated parameter values of the baseline model. The
model is calibrated at the semiannual frequency.

ratio is 0.02 (0.02 in the data).25 In addition, those equity financing
cost parameters suggest that the fixed cost of equity issuance is around
1% of total proceeds and that the variable equity issuance cost is less
than 10% of the amount of issuance, which is similar to the estimates
in Altınkılıç and Hansen (2000) and Hennessy and Whited (2007). The
issuance cost sensitivity parameter 𝑎2 is calibrated to be 10 to match
the volatility of the ratio of firm-level issuance to assets (0.04 in the
data and 0.06 in the model). The Compustat variable SSTK contains
the exercise of stock options to employees as a form of compensation
(among other forms) and, as documented in Fama and French (2005)
and McKeon (2015), these passive issuances are large, relative to SEOs
and private placements. Following Denis and McKeon (2021), when
culculating the fraction of equity issuance, we use the 3% threshold
on market value to purge the vast majority of passive equity issuances
from our Compustat data without sacrificing a substantial number of
active issuances. We set 𝑝𝑑 to be 0.95.26 The carrying cost of holding
cash 𝜅 is set to be 0.016/2 to match the average ratio of net working
capital (0.06 in the data and 0.08 in the model).
𝜆 = 0.05. 𝑎𝐻

𝜆 are essential
for targeting the timing patterns and determining the costs of holding
unpaid revenue. On the one side, we successfully match the average
year-end cash collection (0.01 in the data and 0.01 in the model).
On the other side, cash flow timing patterns simultaneously generate
a sizable YCC premium that cannot be fully explained by CAPM, and
our model is a two-factor asset pricing model, which directly predicts
the misspecification of CAPM. Therefore, we can utilize the failure of
CAPM (CAPM alpha) to identify these time-varying equity issuance
costs, which helps us pin down CAPM pricing errors (CAPM alpha) at
5.66% in the model, close to the data moment at 4.92%.27

𝜆 = 0.29 and 𝑎𝐿

Finally, we set 𝑎𝐻

𝜆 and 𝑎𝐿

25 Similarly, we classify a firm as an equity issuer in a given year if its gross
equity issuance (data item SSTK, sale of common and preferred stock) in that
year is greater than or equal to 3% of its year-end market equity.

26 The most common trade credit term is called ‘‘2-10 net 30’’, implying
a 15.7% semiannual interest rate or a 37.24% annual interest rate. Since our
model is solved at a semiannual frequency, we keep the semiannual discounted
price 𝑝𝑑 in a valid range from 0.843=1-15.7% to 0.9896 = 1
1+𝑟𝑓
27 To compute CAPM alpha, we first estimate the risk factor loading (𝑏𝑀 )
on the stock market factor (MKT) by GMM using the standard asset pricing

.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385510W. Hu et al.

Table 5
Model estimation.

Moments

Panel A: Targeted moments

Data

Model

Aggregate-Level
Average stock market excess return (%)
Sharpe ratio of stock market returns
CAPM alpha (%)
Standard dev. of aggregate cash flow
Autocorrelation of aggregate cash flow
Standard dev. of aggregate equity issuance-to-asset ratio
Autocorrelation of aggregate equity issuance-to-asset ratio
Average fraction of equity issuance
Firm-level
Standard dev. of investment rate
Standard dev. of equity issuance-to-asset ratio
Standard dev. of cash flow
Autocorrlation of cash flow
Interdecile range of investment rate
Mean of equity issuance-to-asset ratio
Mean of cash flow
Mean of year-end cash collection
Mean of year-end net working capital-to-asset ratio

8.86
0.65
4.92
0.02
0.88
0.01
0.53
0.22

0.17
0.04
0.07
0.46
0.34
0.02
0.16
0.01
0.06

6.74
0.51
5.66
0.02
0.70
0.02
0.43
0.23

0.14
0.06
0.06
0.64
0.26
0.02
0.17
0.01
0.08

Evaluation of the calibration

We also assess model performance by reporting the nontargeted
moments in Panel B of Table 5. Since our benchmark calibration does
not target these moments, this exercise serves as an out-of-sample
analysis of our benchmark calibration. The nontargeted model-implied
moments are reasonable and qualitatively consistent with our data. For
example, the model-implied autocorrelation of investment rate is 0.1,
which is close to the data moment at 0.28. Investment rate and sales
growth are positively correlated both in the data and the model (0.26
in the data and 0.55 in the model). Earnings and cash flows are not the
same but still have a strongly positive correlation at 0.8 in our model,
similar to the data moment at 0.55. Our model can also generate a
nontrivial proportion of cash holdings (0.15 in the data and 0.05 in
the model). In addition, we successfully match the following timing
patterns: the cash holding timing patterns suggested by average cash
spread (0.01 in the data and 0.002 in the model) and the cash flow
timing patterns suggested by average OCF spread (0.03 in the data and
0.02 in the model).

Panel B: Nontargeted firm-level moments

4.2. Cross-sectional implications of the model

Moments

Autocorrelation of investment rate
Correlation between investment rate and sales growth
Correlation between earnings and cash flow
Mean of cash ratio
Mean of cash spread
Mean of OCF spread

Data

Model

0.28
0.26
0.55
0.15
0.01
0.03

0.10
0.55
0.80
0.05
0.002
0.02

This table presents the selected target moments in Panel A and nontargeted
moments in Panel B used for the calibration of the baseline model. We compare
the moments in the data with moments of simulated data. The model-implied
moments are the mean value of the corresponding value weighted moments
across 25 samples of simulated data, each with 5000 firms and 100 semiannual
observations (50 years). The empirical data moments are calculated annually. We
time-aggregate the semiannual simulated data to make model-implied moments
comparable with the empirical data. The empirical data are from 1988 to 2022.

Stochastic process. The persistence of idiosyncratic and aggregate
productivity shocks, 𝜌𝑧 and 𝜌𝑥, are calibrated to be 0.81 and 0.88 to
match the autocorrelation of the ratio of firm-level cash flows to assets
and the ratio of aggregate cash flows to assets (0.46 and 0.88 in the
data, and 0.64 and 0.70 in the model). We set the conditional volatility
of both idiosyncratic and aggregate productivity shocks to be 𝜎𝑧 = 0.20
and 𝜎𝑥 = 0.07 so as to match the volatility of the ratio of firm-level cash
flows to assets and the ratio of aggregate cash flows to assets. Given the
volatility and autocorrelation of the ratio of aggregate equity issuance
to assets in the data (0.01 and 0.53), we set the conditional volatility of
the aggregate issuance cost shock to be 𝜎𝜉 = 0.04 and set the persistence
of the aggregate issuance cost shock to be 𝜌𝜉 = 0.87, implying that the
volatility and autocorrelation of the ratio of aggregate issuance to assets
are 0.02 and 0.43 in the model, respectively.

SDF. We set the semiannual risk-free rate to be 2.1%/2. We also
set the market price of risk on the aggregate productivity shock to be
𝛾𝑥 = 6, as well as set the market price of risk on the aggregate financial
shock to be 𝛾𝜉 = 16 by matching the average aggregate stock market
return and the Sharpe ratio as closely as possible. This matching implies
a market excess return of 6.74% and a Sharpe ratio of 0.51, which is
reasonably close to 8.86% and 0.65, respectively, in the data.

To further determine how our model helps explain firms’ optimal
decisions and the risk premium, we report a model simulation at the
portfolio level. Specifically, we sort firms based on YCC using the
same method we described in Section 2. We show that our model can
reproduce the heterogeneity in these firm characteristics: cash flow
timing patterns measured by the OCF spread, cash timing patterns
measured by the cash spread, excess stock returns, cash savings (annual
changes in cash), and annual cumulative ROA.28

In Panel A of Table 6, we present the characteristics for constrained
firms.29 Using our empirical data, we find that firms with the highest
YCC (H) present more positive cash flow timing patterns, a higher cash
spread, higher stock returns, more cash savings, and lower ROA than
firms with the lowest YCC (L). Next, we report firm characteristics with
our simulated data. Our model predicts that firms that collect more cash
flows by year-end display cash flow and cash timing patterns within one
year.

The OCF spread and cash spread range from 0 and −0.029 in the
lowest YCC portfolio to 0.089 and 0.034 in the highest YCC portfolio,
respectively. These results are consistent with our model prediction in
Section 3.4.3. The long-short portfolio constructed using YCC earns an
average excess return of 6.035% per year. Firms in the highest YCC
portfolio have the strongest precautionary motive and thus increase
their cash holdings by 0.024 compared with the last year, whereas this
increase in cash holdings is −0.036 in the lowest YCC group. There is a
declining trend of ROA from the lowest YCC-sorted portfolio at 0.058
to the highest YCC-sorted portfolio at 0.043, which suggests that high
YCC firms that collect more cash flows sacrifice profitability as a result
of costly discounted prices. Overall, these results strongly confirm our
key model predictions and also closely match the data moments.

However, as shown in Panel B, all these monotonic patterns are
much weaker for unconstrained firms, both in the model and our data.
Because unconstrained firms have low financing needs and thus are less
affected by the external financing channel, they display weak timing
patterns in cash flows and cash holdings. In addition, unconstrained
firms demand fewer immediate cash payments and less external fi-
nancing, which makes them less exposed to aggregate productivity and
financial shocks; as a result, unconstrained firms earn lower returns.
Furthermore, unconstrained firms with high YCC are less affected by

moment condition E[𝑟𝑒
𝑡 (1 − 𝑏𝑀 × MKT𝑡)] = 0, in which 𝑟𝑒
𝑡 is the excess return on
the high-minus-low portfolio sorted on YCC. We then add the term 𝛼 (Alpha)
to capture the pricing error (abnormal return), E[𝑟𝑒

𝑡 ] = 𝛼 + 𝑏𝑀 Cov(MKT𝑡, 𝑟𝑒
𝑡 ).

28 In Appendix B, we describe how these characteristics are computed in the

data.

29 We empirically classify financially constrained firms with the WW index.

Our results are similar when we use other financial constraint criteria.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385511W. Hu et al.

Table 6
Firm characteristics and expected returns in the data and model.

Panel A: Constrained Subsample

Data
OCF Spread
Cash Spread
Excess Return (%)
𝛥 Cash
ROA

Model
OCF Spread
Cash Spread
Excess Return (%)
𝛥 Cash
ROA

Data
OCF Spread
Cash Spread
Excess Return (%)
𝛥 Cash
ROA

Model
OCF Spread
Cash Spread
Excess Return (%)
𝛥 Cash
ROA

L

2

3

4

H

H-L

−0.002
0.005
8.211
0.017
0.075

0.000
−0.029
8.107
−0.036
0.058

0.018
0.013
13.704
0.011
0.052

0.010
0.001
9.620
−0.008
0.055

0.028
0.017
11.786
0.014
0.049

0.014
0.002
9.950
−0.003
0.052

0.047
0.031
14.242
0.024
0.046

0.031
0.014
13.579
0.017
0.036

0.099
0.057
14.990
0.037
0.028

0.089
0.034
14.142
0.024
0.043

0.101
0.052
6.779
0.020
−0.047

0.089
0.063
6.035
0.060
−0.015

Panel B: Unconstrained Subsample

L

2

3

4

H

H-L

0.002
0.003
8.707
0.005
0.108

−0.004
−0.012
5.365
−0.013
0.057

0.015
0.004
8.059
0.005
0.089

0.000
0.001
5.363
−0.003
0.057

0.021
0.010
8.338
0.008
0.088

0.001
0.002
5.415
0.001
0.057

0.039
0.014
9.923
0.008
0.098

0.004
0.007
5.536
0.007
0.059

0.080
0.040
10.120
0.025
0.097

0.018
0.030
6.364
0.027
0.066

0.078
0.037
1.412
0.020
−0.011

0.022
0.042
0.999
0.040
0.009

This table reports the value-weighted averages of firm characteristics and value-weighted returns for the
constrained subsample (Panel A) and the unconstrained subsample (Panel B) at the portfolio level in both
the data and model. In the data, we split the whole sample into financially constrained and unconstrained
firms, as classified by the WW index. In the model, we split the whole sample into financially constrained
and unconstrained firms, as classified by the marginal value of cash. Detailed variable definitions correspond
to those in Table B.1.

costly discounted prices. Therefore, there is no declining trend in ROA
in the unconstrained subsample relative to the constrained subsample.
In sum, we show that our model predictions for unconstrained firm
characteristics fit our data well. More importantly, our results further
confirm the important role that financial constraints play in explaining
cash flow timing patterns and high-minus-low YCC return spreads.

The relative contribution of 𝛾𝑥 and 𝛾𝜉

According to Eq. (22), the YCC premium is qualitatively positive in
the model. The quantitative importance of firms’ exposure to different
aggregate shocks is not observed. To evaluate the importance of these
parameters for our model’s results, we perform comparative statistics
with respect to the market price of risk parameters, 𝛾𝑥 and 𝛾𝜉 .

Table 7 reports the YCC premium, market excess return, CAPM
alpha and other firm characteristics under alternative specifications,
which are compared against our baseline calibration. In column (2), we
set the price of risk of the aggregate financial shock to be 8, which is
half of the calibrated value in our benchmark. We find that the average
excess returns decrease from 6.735% to 6.683% and the YCC premium
decreases from 6.035% to 3.132%, implying that the aggregate finan-
cial shock has a non-trivial effect on the YCC premium. In column (3),
we reduce the price of risk of the aggregate productivity shock to 3 (6
in benchmark). The average excess return drops significantly to 2.82%,
and the YCC premium decreases to 1.377%, implying that the aggregate
productivity shock drives the aggregate market premium and is also an
important factor in determining the YCC premium.

The role of state-dependent financing costs

In this paper, cash flow timing patterns and the YCC premium are
𝜆 . We compute

driven by the state-dependent financing costs, 𝑎𝐻

𝜆 and 𝑎𝐿

Table 7
Alternative calibrations.

Baseline
(1)

𝛾𝜉 = 8
(2)

𝛾𝑥 = 3
(3)

𝑎𝑠
𝜆 = 0.075
(4)

𝜆 = 𝑎𝐿
𝑎𝐻
(5)

𝜆 = 0

𝑔 = 0.7
(6)

Asset Prices
YCC Premium (%)
MKT (%)
CAPM alpha (%)
Real Quantities
OCF spread
Cash
S.D. I/k

6.035
6.735
5.219

0.016
0.048
0.138

3.132
6.683
3.200

0.020
0.048
0.137

1.377
2.820
1.212

0.017
0.063
0.143

5.587
6.968
3.547

0.002
0.046
0.126

4.599
5.769
3.204

0.002
0.039
0.141

5.159
7.537
4.218

0.012
0.046
0.057

This table presents certain comparative statistical exercises. We specify the stochastic
discount factor to have a low price of risk of aggregate financial shock, 𝛾𝜉 = 8 in column
(2); a low price of risk of aggregate productivity shock, 𝛾𝑥 = 3 in column (3); constant
agency costs, 𝑎𝑠
𝜆 = 0
in column (5); a high quadratic adjustment cost, 𝑔 = 0.7 in column (6). The reported
statistics for each alternative specification of the model are obtained from 25 samples
of simulated data, each with 5000 firms and 100 semiannual observations.

𝜆 = 0.075, 𝑠 ∈ {𝐿, 𝐻} in column (4); zero agency costs, 𝑎𝐻

𝜆 = 𝑎𝐿

𝜆 to

𝜆 and 𝑎𝐿

𝜆 and 𝑎𝐿

model-implied moments from alternative calibrations of 𝑎𝐻
explore the role of state-dependent financing costs.
First, we shut down the difference between 𝑎𝐻

𝜆 = 𝑎𝐿
𝜆 (𝑎𝐻
𝜆 =
0.075). We show that by removing the difference between 𝑎𝐻
𝜆 and 𝑎𝐿
𝜆 ,
the YCC premium and CAPM alpha drop significantly from 6.035% and
5.219% in the baseline model to 5.587% and 3.547% in Column (4) of
Table 7. In addition, the OCF spread diminishes, and firms hold less
cash (0.048 in the baseline model, and 0.046 here). Second, we shut
down state-dependent financing costs completely (𝑎𝐻
𝜆 = 0). The
YCC premium and CAPM alpha continue decreasing to 4.599% and
3.204%. The OCF spread is near zero, and the average cash ratio drops
to 0.039 here.

𝜆 = 𝑎𝐿

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385512W. Hu et al.

These results show that state-dependent financing costs, 𝑎𝐻

𝜆 and 𝑎𝐿
𝜆 ,
significantly impact both asset pricing moments (e.g., the YCC premium
and CAPM alpha) and real quantities (e.g., cash flow timing patterns).

The role of capital adjustment costs

Column (6) in Table 7 shows that increasing the quadratic cap-
ital adjustment cost to 0.7 (𝑔 = 0.26 in the baseline model) has a
large effect on real quantities, significantly reducing the volatility of
investment rate from 0.138 to 0.057. In addition, as 𝑔 increases, a firm
makes fewer large investments and thus is less likely to tap external
financing. Therefore, the average cash ratio decreases from 0.048 in
our baseline model to 0.046. The OCF spread diminishes since the firm
does not issue equity very often and is thus less likely to be affected
by state-dependent financing costs. Again, the quadratic adjustment
cost also has a relatively small effect on asset prices. Market excess
return increases to 7.537% compared with 6.735% in the baseline
model because high capital adjustment costs deprive the flexibility
of investment, thus making the economy riskier. However, the YCC
premium drops to 5.159% because of a weaker timing pattern of cash
flows.

5. Other testable model implications

5.1. Market price of macroeconomic shocks

In this section, we show that firms’ different degrees of exposure
to macroeconomic shocks help explain cross-sectional variation in the
risk premiums of YCC-sorted portfolios. We undertake this analysis by
assuming that the SDF that prices all assets in the economy is given by:

𝑀𝑡 = 1 − 𝑏𝑀𝐾𝑇 ×MKTt − 𝒃′𝐌𝐚𝐜𝐫𝐨𝐭 .

(23)

Here, consistent with our model, we introduce two different macroeco-
nomic shocks: 𝐌𝐚𝐜𝐫𝐨𝐭 , which is a 2 × 1 column vector that contains the
proxies for aggregate financial and productivity shocks; and 𝒃, which is
a 2 × 1 column vector of the corresponding market price of risk parame-
ters. Specifically, we use issuance cost shock (ICS) data from Belo et al.
(2019) to measure the aggregate financial shock, and we use the log
difference in total factor productivity (TFP) from the Federal Reserve
Bank’s official website to measure the aggregate productivity shock. For
the sake of comparison, we also consider the standard capital asset pric-
ing model (CAPM), which includes only the stock market factor (MKT).
We then estimate the market price of risk parameters by two-step GMM
using the standard asset pricing moment condition E[𝑟𝑒
𝑖,𝑡𝑀𝑡] = 0, in
which 𝑟𝑒
𝑖,𝑡 is the excess return on portfolio 𝑖 at time 𝑡. Finally, we com-
pute the sum of squared errors (SSQE), mean absolute pricing errors
(MAPE), and the J-statistic of the overidentifying restrictions of model.
All the pricing errors are zero if our model specification is correct.

Panel A of Table 8 reports the risk characteristics for the five
portfolios sorted on their YCC. First, the sensitivities with respect to
the aggregate financial and productivity shocks both display a largely
upward-sloping pattern from the lowest to the highest YCC quintile
portfolio. These portfolios present an upward-sloping pattern of risk
exposure with the empirical measures of the aggregate financial and
productivity shocks. The differences in sensitivities between the highest
and the lowest portfolio are significantly positive with t-statistics of
1.72 and 3.10, respectively. Namely, the highest YCC quintile faces
a higher risk exposure than the lowest YCC quintile with respect to
aggregate financial and productivity shocks.

Panel B of Table 8 presents the two-step GMM results of market
prices of risk using the identity matrix to weigh moment restrictions.
We adjust standard errors using the Newey–West procedure with a
maximum of five lags. The estimated market price of risk on the
issuance cost shock (ICS) is statistically positive at the 1% level, with
a value of 1.81 and a t-statistic of 2.85. These results confirm that,
according to Eq. (23), periods in which it is particularly costly to
issue equity (low ICS) are usually associated with high marginal utility.

Table 8
Estimating the market price of risk.

Panel A: Portfolio Risk Exposure

L

4.78
(1.56)
3.91
(0.84)

2

5.15
(1.90)
4.81
(1.12)

3

5.73
(1.89)
5.69
(1.30)

4

5.76
(1.84)
5.48
(1.29)

H

6.47
(1.95)
6.27
(1.32)

H-L

1.69
(1.72)
2.36
(3.10)

ICS
(t)
TFP
(t)

Parameters

𝑏𝑀𝐾𝑇
(t)
𝑏𝐼𝐶𝑆
(t)
𝑏𝑇 𝐹 𝑃
(t)
SSQE(%)
MAPE(%)
J-test
p

Panel B: Price of Risks

CAPM

0.86
(10.32)

0.51
1.61
5.74
0.77

+ICS+TFP

−0.03
(−0.14)
1.81
(2.85)
0.78
(2.06)
0.25
1.26
1.76
0.97

𝑖,𝑡𝑀𝑡] = 0, in which 𝑀𝑡 = 1−𝑏𝑀𝐾𝑇 ×MKTt −𝒃′𝐌𝐚𝐜𝐫𝐨𝐭 . 𝑟𝑒

This table presents the risk price estimates for the aggregate financial and productivity
shocks. In Panel A, we use the YCC-sorted portfolios as test portfolios and report
risk exposure with respect to the measures of aggregate macroeconomic shocks: the
aggregate financial shock and the productivity shock. Panel B reports the average
estimates of the market prices of risk associated with the CAPM estimated with and
without aggregate financial and productivity shocks. The asset pricing models are
estimated with the generalized method of moments (GMM) using the standard asset
pricing moment condition E[𝑟𝑒
𝑖,𝑡 is
the equal weighted excess return of the YCC-sorted portfolios. MKTt is the (demeaned)
market excess return and 𝑏𝑀 is the corresponding market price of risk on the SDF.
𝐌𝐚𝐜𝐫𝐨𝐭
includes measures of aggregate macroeconomic shocks: the first one is the
issuance cost shock (ICS), constructed by Belo et al. (2019) at the annual frequency
to measure the aggregate financial shock; the second one is the aggregate productivity
shock measured by the log difference in total factor productivity (TFP). All shocks are
normalized to have a zero mean and unit standard deviation. We report HAC 𝑡-statistics
computed errors using the Newey–West procedure adjusted for a maximum of five lags.
As a measure of fit, we report the sum of squared errors (SSQE), mean absolute pricing
errors (MAPE), and the J-statistic of the overidentifying restrictions of the model. The
sample includes annual data from 1988 to 2022.

These results also present a positive market price of risk on the total
factor productivity (TFP) shock, with a value of 0.78 and a t-statistic
of 2.06, which is statistically significant at the 5% level. Additionally,
the asset pricing model with ICS and TFP factors performs significantly
better than the CAPM, reducing the sum of squares to 0.25 relative to
0.51 and reducing the mean absolute pricing errors to 1.26 relative to
1.61. Lastly, the J-test is statistically insignificant and does not reject
the model when we introduce the ICS and TFP factors, which implies
that the average pricing error becomes smaller and even statistically
insignificant. Therefore, the ICS and TFP factors in the asset pricing
model are sufficient for capturing the cross-sectional variations in the
YCC-sorted portfolios.

5.2. State-dependent financing costs

In our model, cash flow timing patterns are mainly driven by
regime-shifting financing costs. To justify this assumption, we collect
detailed issuance information from the SDC Platinum database. We
then merge the SDC Platinum database with the fundamental infor-
mation from Compustat. Following the literature (Piotroski and So,
2012), we match issuance details and the most recently available
fundamental information by imposing a four-month information lag on
fundamentals. Finally, we use linear regressions to empirically examine
the state-dependent impact of unpaid revenue on equity financing costs.
The dependent variable represents total issuance fees scaled by
assets. Following the literature (Altınkılıç and Hansen, 2000; Fang,
2005), we also control for standard firm-level variables commonly
found in empirical studies: total proceeds (the ratio of proceeds to
assets), firm size (log of total assets), financial leverage, return volatility

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385513W. Hu et al.

Table 9
The impact of unpaid revenue on equity financing costs.

Dep Var

Issuance fees

Full sample

(1)

(2)

Con

(3)

Uncon

(4)

Proceeds
(t)
DummyUnpaid
(t)
Proceeds × DummyUnpaid
(t)
Dummy𝑄3,𝑄4
(t)
Proceeds × DummyQ3,Q4
(t)
DummyUnpaid × DummyQ3,Q4
(t)
Proceeds × DummyUnpaid × DummyQ3,Q4
(t)
Intercept

Observations
R-squared

0.052*** 0.055***
(66.981)
(86.784)
−0.000
0.001
(−0.098)
(1.506)
0.002*** −0.002
(3.057)

0.037***
(26.120)
−0.000
(−1.216)
0.005***
(2.721)
−0.000
(−0.397)

0.055***
(46.010)
0.003***
(2.582)
−0.002
(−1.390)
(−1.456)
0.004***
0.002***
(3.504)
(3.444)
−0.006*** −0.007*** 0.000
(−5.684)
(−4.507)
(0.069)
−0.002*** −0.005*** −0.000
(−3.480)
(−2.955)
0.009***
0.007***
(4.511)
(4.947)
0.005
0.003
(0.953)
(1.559)

(−0.479)
0.002
(0.827)
0.000
(0.224)

4096
0.906

2596
0.901

1200
0.891

0.005**
(2.480)

4096
0.904

This table shows the regressions of issuance fees from SDC on several characteristics of
issuance and issuers. We report full sample results in column (1) and column (2). We
run a regression for the financially constrained subsample in column (3) and for the
unconstrained subsample in column (4). Firms are classified as constrained according to
the WW index. The dependent variable is total issuance fees scaled by assets. Consistent
with the model, we measure unpaid revenue as the ratio of net working capital to sales.
The dummy variable DummyUnpaid takes the value of one if a firm’s unpaid revenue
ratio is above the median; otherwise, it takes the value of zero. The dummy variable
DummyQ3,Q4 equals one for all fiscal Q3 and Q4 and zero for fiscal Q1 and Q2. We
also control for the standard firm-level variables commonly found in empirical studies:
total proceeds (the ratio of proceeds to assets), firm size (log of total assets), financial
leverage, return volatility (annualized standard deviation of monthly stock returns),
and investment opportunities (market-to-book). Firm fixed effect is controlled.

(annualized standard deviation of monthly stock returns), and invest-
ment opportunities (market-to-book). We also include the firm fixed
effects to account for unobserved factors.

To examine the impact of unpaid revenue on the linear term of
financing costs, we include the interaction term between total proceeds
and the dummy of high unpaid revenue (Proceeds × DummyUnpaid) in
column (1) of Table 9. The dummy variable DummyUnpaid is one if
a firm’s unpaid revenue ratio is above the median, otherwise zero.
Consistent with the model, we measure the unpaid revenue ratio as the
ratio of net working capital to sales. We find that the interaction term
is significantly positive at the 1% level, while the coefficient of unpaid
revenue is not statistically different from zero. This implies that the
direct financing costs of firms with high unpaid revenue are higher. In
column (2) of Table 9, we also introduce an interaction term between
total proceeds, high unpaid revenue dummy, and a dummy variable,
DummyQ3,Q4, which equals one for all fiscal Q3 and Q4 and zero for
fiscal Q1 and Q2. More importantly, the coefficient of the interaction
term, Proceeds × DummyUnpaid × DummyQ3,Q4, is 0.007 and statistically
significant. The coefficient of the interaction term suggests that firms
with high unpaid revenue face 0.7% higher year-end equity issuance
costs. These results are consistent with our assumption that marginal
equity financing costs are more sensitive to year-end unpaid revenue.
Finally, we explore whether the effect of unpaid revenue on financ-
ing costs varies according to the degree of financial constraints. We run
the regression for financially constrained firms in column (3) and for
unconstrained firms in column (4) of Table 9. Our results show that
for financially constrained firms, the coefficient of the interaction term
(Proceeds × DummyUnpaid × DummyQ3,Q4) is 0.009, which is statistically
significant at the 1% level and much larger than that for financially
unconstrained firms. Based on our findings, financially constrained
firms experiencing high levels of unpaid revenue incur a 0.9% increase
in year-end equity issuance costs. In sum, the impact of year-end unpaid
revenue on marginal financing costs is more pronounced for financially
constrained firms.

Discussion: alternative channels of YCC. While the empirical
evidence presented in this section supports the financing cost channel
in explaining the correlation between YCC and financial constraints,
there are alternative explanations for this correlation. We consider three
possible channels—namely, tax planning, managerial compensation,
and liquidity management. These channels may be related to YCC and
financial constraints. To rule out alternative explanations, we provide
a detailed discussion of these channels and examine whether these
channels are correlated to financial constraints in Internet Appendix
B. We show that none of these channels helps explain the link between
YCC and financial constraints.

5.3. Fama–MacBeth regressions

In this subsection, we extend our previous analysis to investigate
the link between YCC and future stock returns by using firm-level mul-
tivariate regressions that include firms’ YCC and other characteristics as
return predictors. In particular, we perform standard firm-level cross-
sectional regressions (Fama and MacBeth, 1973) to predict future stock
returns:

𝑟𝑒
𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 × YCC𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾 × Controls𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡+1.

(24)

in which 𝑟𝑒

𝑖,𝑡+1 is stock 𝑖’s cumulative excess return from July of
year 𝑡 to June of year 𝑡 + 1. The control variables include year-end
cash collection (YCC), the natural logarithm of market capitalization
at the end of each June (ME) deflated by the GDP deflator, the natural
logarithm of the book-to-market ratio (BM), book leverage (Book Lev),
profitability (ROA), and the investment rate (I/K). All independent vari-
ables are normalized to a zero mean and a one standard deviation after
winsorization at the 1st and 99th percentiles to reduce the impact of
outliers. To avoid using future information, all balance sheet variables
are based on the values available before the end of year 𝑡; we also
adjust all independent variables for standard errors using Newey–West
adjustments.

We divide our sample into financially constrained and uncon-
strained subsamples, and then estimate cross-sectional regressions at an
annual frequency for each subsample. Table 10 shows that regressions
exhibit a significantly positive slope coefficient on YCC for financially
constrained firms, but not for financially unconstrained firms. Specifi-
cally, the coefficient estimates for constrained firms vary between 1.220
and 1.560 and are all statistically significant at the 1% level, whereas
those for unconstrained firms are not significant (in WW and Size
groups) or smaller in terms of magnitude (in SA and Payout groups).
Therefore, the results of Fama–MacBeth regressions across financially
constrained firms are consistent with our theoretical prediction that
high YCC firms are riskier and thus are expected to earn higher returns.

5.4. Characteristics across portfolios

Our model can quantitatively reproduce a monotonic pattern be-
tween YCC and other firm characteristics, such as cash savings. To
empirically examine this prediction, we report the value-weighted av-
erages of firm characteristics across five portfolios sorted on YCC in
Table 11 for the constrained subsample.

In Panel A, we first show a decreasing trend in both the noncash net
working capital ratio (NWC Ratio) and profitability (ROA) from low to
high YCC portfolios. That is, by decreasing noncash net working capital,
firms can collect more cash by year-end at the expense of profitability.
Second, in terms of firms’ saving policy, the cash savings (𝛥 Cash)
characteristic displays a monotonically increasing pattern from 0.017 in
the lowest portfolio to 0.037 in the highest portfolios. Finally, there are
no monotonic relationships found in the book-to-market ratio (B/M),
investment rate (I/K), and leverage ratio (Book Lev) across YCC-sorted
portfolios.

Panel B reports the portfolio value-weighted averages of year-end
cash collection (YCC), the operating cash flow spread (OCF Spread), the

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385514W. Hu et al.

Table 10
Fama–MacBeth regressions.

Dep Var
E[𝑅] − 𝑅𝑓 (%)

YCC
(t)
Log ME
(t)
Log BM
(t)
Book Lev
(t)
ROA
(t)
I/K
(t)
Observations
R-squared

Measure of financial constraint

WW index

Total asset

SA index

Con

Uncon

Con

Uncon

Con

1.370***
(3.372)
−1.307
(−0.969)
1.447*
(2.031)
1.070
(1.556)
1.206***
(3.392)
−0.548
(−1.237)
31,299
0.039

0.063
(0.253)
−0.656
(−0.715)
0.376
(0.568)
0.522
(0.862)
−0.156
(−0.212)
−0.331
(−0.361)
20,298
0.072

1.312***
(3.259)
−1.882
(−1.194)
1.308*
(1.735)
0.989
(1.354)
1.163***
(3.431)
−0.335
(−0.675)
31,099
0.040

0.374
(1.086)
−1.455
(−1.538)
0.457
(0.788)
0.429
(0.866)
0.723
(1.031)
−0.615
(−0.768)
20,567
0.068

1.220***
(3.055)
−0.854
(−0.778)
1.710**
(2.443)
0.918
(1.242)
1.113***
(3.084)
−0.446
(−0.883)
30,014
0.042

Uncon

0.815**
(2.223)
−0.459
(−0.628)
0.837
(1.358)
1.183**
(2.097)
1.032
(1.614)
−0.555
(−0.666)
21,652
0.062

Payout

Con

1.560***
(2.919)
−0.971
(−0.804)
1.307*
(1.875)
0.614
(0.720)
1.378***
(3.210)
−0.629
(−1.366)
26,052
0.046

Uncon

0.678**
(2.457)
−0.461
(−0.762)
1.379**
(2.147)
1.386***
(2.766)
1.161**
(2.211)
−0.309
(−0.347)
25,614
0.054

This table reports the results of Fama–MacBeth regressions of annual cumulative firm-level excess stock returns on lagged firm characteristics.
The regression coefficients reported in the table are the time-series averages of the slope coefficients from year-by-year cross-sectional regressions.
We split the whole sample into financially constrained and unconstrained subsamples at the end of every June, as classified by the WW index,
total assets, the SA index, and the dividend payment dummy at the end of year t−1. Our control variables include Log ME, Log BM, Book Lev,
ROA, and I/K. The detailed definitions correspond to those in Table B.1. The 𝑡-statistics (in parentheses) are computed based on Newey and
West (1986) adjusted standard errors. The annual data start in 1988 and end in 2022. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

Table 11
Summary statistics.

BM
I/K
ROA
NWC Ratio
Book Lev
𝛥 Cash

YCC
OCF Spread
I/A Spread
ROA Spread
Cash Spread

Panel A. Firm characteristics

L

0.371
0.391
0.075
0.173
0.180
0.017

L

−0.061
−0.002
0.010
0.019
0.005

2

0.411
0.328
0.052
0.113
0.212
0.011

3

0.409
0.312
0.049
0.088
0.216
0.014

Panel B. Timing pattern

2

−0.013
0.018
0.008
0.008
0.013

3

0.006
0.028
0.010
0.003
0.017

4

0.424
0.327
0.046
0.090
0.206
0.024

4

0.025
0.047
0.012
0.002
0.031

H

0.405
0.360
0.028
0.083
0.188
0.037

H

0.079
0.099
0.010
−0.004
0.057

This table reports the value-weighted averages of firm characteristics (Panel A) and
timing proxies (Panel B) across five YCC-sorted portfolios in the constrained subsample.
YCC is defined in Section 2.2. BM is the book-to-market ratio. I/K is the ratio of
investment to purchased capital. ROA is the income before extraordinary items divided
by lagged assets. NWC Ratio is the noncash net working capital scaled by total assets.
Book Lev is the sum of long- and short-term debt divided by total assets. 𝛥 Cash is
the change in cash holdings over one fiscal year divided by lagged assets. Our timing
proxies are the corresponding average differences between the second half of the fiscal
year and the first half of the fiscal year, including operating cash flow spread (OCF
Spread), investment-to-asset spread (I/A Spread), return on assets spread (ROA Spread),
and cash spread (Cash Spread). Detailed definitions correspond to those in Table B.1.
The sample starts in 1987 and ends in 2021.

cash flows might not result from earnings manipulations. On the other
hand, we find a positive I/A spread in all portfolios, and there is not
much variation in the I/A spread. One possible explanation for our
finding is that the I/A spread could be driven by other factors, such as
tax minimization (Kinney and Trezevant, 1993; Xu and Zwick, 2020).
Overall, our model implications on YCC and firm characteristics can

be confirmed empirically.

6. Alternative channels

Our model suggests that a primary explanation for the year-end cash
collection premium is that firms with high year-end cash collections
are more financially constrained and thus more exposed to aggregate
financial shocks. Although our model suggests that this mechanism
is quantitatively important in Section 3.6, it is still possible that the
return spread is related to other mechanisms. Thus, in this section, we
consider some alternative explanations and examine their impacts on
the year-end cash collection premium.

6.1. The YCC premium versus the accruals effect

Sloan (1996) shows that firms with low accruals earn high future
returns. Since the change in noncash net working capital is also a
component of accruals, there is a mechanical relation between accruals
and YCC. Following Sloan (1996), we define the accruals (denoted
ACC) of firm 𝑖 at time 𝑡 as:
i,t − NWCQ4
NWCQ4
ATi,t−1

i,t−1 − DPi,t

ACCi,t =

(25)

,

investment-to-assets spread (I/A Spread), the profitability spread (ROA
Spread), and the cash spread (Cash Spread). The spread of a variable
is computed as the difference between the corresponding values in
the late part of the year and the early part of the year. First, we
show an upward pattern in the cash spread and OCF spread from the
lowest to highest portfolios. This upward pattern indicates that firms
can receive more cash flows at year-end by manipulating their working
capital, and that they save more cash in the later part of the year
to hedge cash flow shortfalls in the early part of the following year.
However, we do not find a significant pattern in the ROA spread and
I/A spread. On the one hand, the ROA spread is close to zero across
all five portfolios – much smaller than the OCF spread, 0.099, in the
highest YCC portfolio – implying that the timing pattern of operating

in which DPi,t is the depreciation of firm 𝑖 at time 𝑡. There are some dif-
ferences between the definitions of accruals and YCC. First, compared
with the definition of YCC in Eq. (1), the construction of accruals in-
cludes a depreciation term; we do not use depreciation when computing
YCC because depreciation, as a tool of earnings management, would
not affect cash flow items. Second, with respect to time span, ACC is
calculated as the increase in noncash net working capital for the entire
fiscal year, whereas YCC is constructed as the decrease in noncash
net working capital in the second half of the fiscal year, resulting in
a negative correlation between ACC and YCC. Since there is a large
literature on the accrual anomaly that suggests firms with high accruals
earn a low return (see, e.g., Sloan, 1996; Hirshleifer et al., 2011), it is
important to examine whether the year-end cash collection premium

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385515W. Hu et al.

still exists after we control for accruals. To do this, we implement a
double-sort analysis following Grigoris et al. (2023). First, we construct
the YCC spread across three accruals-sorted portfolios. Our results in
Panel A of Table C.9 in the Internet Appendix show that the YCC spread
earns over 6.7% per year among high accrual firms. The YCC spread
within this accruals-sorted portfolios is significant at the 1% level.
Furthermore, a joint test shows that the average YCC premium across
all accrual groups is significant at the 5% level. In sum, our findings
suggest that the YCC spread cannot be explained by the accruals effect
of Sloan (1996).

In Panel B of Table C.9 in the Internet Appendix, we reverse the
order of the sorts to examine whether the accruals effect survives when
we control for YCC. Our results show that the accruals spread are
statistically significant for the portfolio of low YCC firms. However,
the null hypothesis that the accruals spread is zero across all three YCC-
sorted portfolios is also rejected. The economic determinants of the YCC
premium may not help to explain the accruals effect of Sloan (1996).
In summary, the ACC and YCC premium cannot explain each other.

6.2. The YCC premium versus the cash-related premium

Palazzo (2012) proposes that riskier firms (i.e., firms with a higher
correlation between cash flow and the aggregate shock) have higher
financing needs and thus have higher optimal savings. This precaution-
ary savings motive implies a positive relation between excess equity re-
turns and cash holdings. Since our measure of YCC also varies positively
with cash savings as well as cash holdings, we must show whether our
cross-sectional results are driven by the cash-related premium.

As previously, we conduct a double-sort analysis in Table C.10 of
the Internet Appendix. In Panel A, we show that the YCC spread is
statistically significant in the medium and high cash-sorted portfolios,
and the joint test suggests that the average YCC spread of all cash-
sorted portfolios is significantly positive at the 1% level. In Panel B,
the cash spread is insignificant across all cash-sorted portfolios, and the
null hypothesis that the cash spread is zero across all three YCC-sorted
portfolios is not rejected.

6.3. Asset pricing factor test

We next perform standard asset pricing tests to investigate whether
the YCC premium can be explained by standard risk factors, as rep-
resented by the (Carhart, 1997) four-factor model and the (Fama and
French, 2015) five-factor model.

To test the standard risk-factor models, we perform time-series re-
gressions of the excess returns of YCC-sorted portfolios on the (Carhart,
1997) four-factor model (FF3 factors and the momentum factor-MOM)
in Panel A of Table C.11, and on the (Fama and French, 2015) five-
factor model (FF3 factors, the profitability factor (RMW), and the
investment factor (CMA)) in Panel B of Table C.11 in the Internet
Appendix.

As we show in Table C.11 of the Internet Appendix, the risk-adjusted
returns (intercepts) of the YCC-sorted high-minus-low portfolio remain
large and significant, ranging from 5.92% for the (Carhart, 1997) four-
factor model in Panel A to 6.64% for the (Fama and French, 2015)
five-factor model in Panel B with a t-statistic of 2.81, which is above
the 1% statistical significance level. In addition, the alpha implied by
these standard factor models remains comparable to the YCC spread
(i.e., the return on the high-minus-low portfolio) in Table 3.

Taken together, these results from the asset pricing tests in Table
C.11 of the Internet Appendix suggest that the cross-sectional return
spread across portfolios sorted on YCC cannot be explained by ei-
ther the (Carhart, 1997) four-factor model or the (Fama and French,
2005) five-factor model. Hence, common risk factors cannot explain
the higher returns associated with YCC.

7. Conclusion

We investigate firms’ year-end cash collection behavior and its im-
plications for asset pricing and cash holdings. We document significant
cash flow timing patterns; that is, firms collect almost 70% of their
yearly cash flows by year-end. We then show that the timing patterns
are positively related to financial constraints. Further, a long-short
portfolio constructed from firms with high versus low year-end cash
collection generates a 6.8% average excess return.

We develop a dynamic investment-based model with two types of
revenue – unpaid and paid revenue – to explain cash flow timing
patterns and the high-minus-low YCC portfolio return spread. In our
model, suppliers can demand cash payments by offering customers a
price discount or by allowing customers to pay in the next period.
Thus, high cash collection reduces profitability. However, higher cash
collection also leads to higher information transparency and reduces
the cost of accessing the financial market. As firms attract more atten-
tion by year-end, they collect more cash flows to increase information
transparency by year-end. Financially constrained firms have a greater
incentive to collect more cash flows by year-end, thereby increasing
equity financing in the next period. The economic mechanism of the
YCC spread is that future cash flows of high YCC firms primarily consist
of immediate payments; thus, they are more exposed to aggregate
productivity shocks. In addition, high YCC firms must offer more of
a discount to customers, which makes them less profitable in financing
future investments and more exposed to aggregate financial shocks.

Through calibration and simulation, we show that our model can
reproduce empirical cash flow timing patterns well. In addition, our
model predicts that high YCC firms are less profitable, save more
cash, and show a higher within-year spread in their cash holdings. We
provide empirical evidence supporting our predictions. Our model also
quantitatively matches the YCC premium to our data. The implications
of our model assumptions are further supported by empirical tests.

Finally, our paper extends the implications of – and confirms the im-
portance of – aggregate equity financing cost shocks suggested by Eis-
feldt and Muir (2016) and Belo et al. (2019). We assume that aggregate
issuance cost shocks are exogenous. By affecting firms’ YCC, cash
savings, and investment decisions, these shocks are likely to affect
aggregate quantities as well. An interesting direction for future research
would be to endogenize such aggregate shocks in a general equilibrium
setup, which may be important for obtaining an accurate understanding
of the YCC premium.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Solution procedure

The model is solved on discrete grids by value function iteration.
Eq. (15) is very hard to solve numerically, as it has more than five
state variables. The computational burden dramatically rises as the
number of state variables increases. The value of the firm is a function
of productivity (𝑧𝑡), the aggregate level of external financing cost (𝜉𝑡),
the attention state (𝑠𝑡), capital (𝐾𝑡), cash holdings (𝐿𝑡), the lagged
proportion of cash payments (𝜆𝑡−1), and lagged output (𝛱𝑡−1). Without
a loss of generality, we let 𝐻𝑡 = 𝐿𝑡 + (1−𝜏)(1−𝜆𝑡−1)𝛱𝑡−1
. The firm’s
pre-financing payout in Eq. (10) can then be rewritten as:

1+𝑟𝑠(1−𝜏)

𝐸𝑡 = (1 + 𝑟𝑠(1 − 𝜏))𝐻𝑡 + (1 − 𝜏)𝑝𝑑 𝜆𝑡𝛱𝑡 − (1 − 𝜏)𝑓 + 𝜏𝛿𝐾𝑡 − 𝐼𝑡

−

𝑔𝐼 2
𝑡
2𝐾𝑡

+

(1 − 𝜏)(1 − 𝜆𝑡)𝛱𝑡
1 + 𝑟𝑠(1 − 𝜏)

− 𝐻𝑡+1.

(A.1)

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385516W. Hu et al.

Table B.1
Definition of variables.

ME

OCF

ROA

YCC

Accrual

BM

Book Lev

I/K

NWC

Earnings

Cash

𝛥 Cash

SA Index

WW Index

Size

Dividend dummy

OCF spread

Market capitalization deflated by GDP deflator at the end of
June in year t.

Operating cash flow (OANCF + XINT) divided by lagged
assets.

Income before extraordinary items (IB) divided by lagged
assets.

For details, refer to Section 2.2.

For details, refer to Section 6.1.

Ratio of book equity to market equity, for which both book
equity and market equity values follow definitions in Fama
and French (1993).

Sum of long-term liability (DLTT) and current liability
(DLCT) divided by total assets (AT).

Ratio of investment (CAPX-SPPE) to purchased capital
(PPENT).

Noncash net working capital ((ACT-CHE)-(LCT-DLC-TXP)).

Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and
amortization (EBITDA) divided by lagged assets.

Cash equivalents (CHE) divided by total assets (AT).

Changes in cash holdings (CHECH) over one fiscal year
divided by lagged total assets (AT).

Following Hadlock and Pierce (2010).

Following Whited and Wu (2006).

Natural logarithm of total assets (AT) deflated by GDP
deflator.

Dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm’s dividend payment
(DVT) over the year was positive, and zero otherwise.

Difference between operating cash flow in the last two fiscal
quarters (OANCF Q3+XINT Q3+OANCF Q4+XINT Q4) and
operating cash flow in the first two fiscal quarters (OANCF
Q1+XINT Q1+OANCF Q2+XINT Q2) divided by lagged total
assets (AT). Other spread variables (e.g., I/K Spread) are
constructed similarly.

CRSP

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Compustat

Substituting Eq. (A.1) with Eq. (15), the firm’s problem can then be

Bates, T.W., Kahle, K.M., Stulz, R.M., 2009. Why do US firms hold so much more cash

summarized by the following Bellman equation:

𝑉𝑡(𝑥𝑡, 𝜉𝑡, 𝑠𝑡, 𝑧𝑡, 𝐾𝑡, 𝐻𝑡) = max

𝐷𝑡

𝐾𝑡+1,𝐻𝑡+1,𝜆𝑡
+ E

𝑡[𝑀𝑡,𝑡+1𝑉𝑡+1(𝑥𝑡+1, 𝜉𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑡+1, 𝑧𝑡+1, 𝐾𝑡+1, 𝐻𝑡+1)].
(A.2)

The goal of a numerical solution is to obtain a mapping from (𝑥𝑡, 𝜉𝑡,
𝑠𝑡, 𝑧𝑡, 𝐾𝑡, 𝐻𝑡) to 𝑉𝑡(𝑥𝑡, 𝜉𝑡, 𝑠𝑡, 𝑧𝑡, 𝐾𝑡, 𝐻𝑡). We note that we can distinguish
cash holdings (𝐿𝑡) from 𝐻𝑡, as we still have information about the
policy path of 𝜆𝑡−1.

Appendix B. Variable construction

See Table B.1.

Appendix C. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

than they used to? J. Finance 64 (5), 1985–2021.

Belo, F., Li, J., Lin, X., Zhao, X., 2017. Labor-force heterogeneity and asset prices: The

importance of skilled labor. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (10), 3669–3709.

Belo, F., Lin, X., 2012. The inventory growth spread. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (1),

278–313.

Belo, F., Lin, X., Yang, F., 2019. External equity financing shocks, financial flows, and

asset prices. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (9), 3500–3543.

Bloom, N., 2009. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623–685.
Boldrin, M., Christiano, L.J., Fisher, J.D., 2001. Habit persistence, asset returns, and

the business cycle. Amer. Econ. Rev. 91 (1), 149–166.

Bolton, P., Chen, H., Wang, N., 2011. A unified theory of Tobin’s q, corporate
investment, financing, and risk management. J. Finance 66 (5), 1545–1578.
Bolton, P., Chen, H., Wang, N., 2013. Market timing, investment, and risk management.

J. Financ. Econ. 109 (1), 40–62.

Bradshaw, M.T., Richardson, S.A., Sloan, R.G., 2001. Do analysts and auditors use

information in accruals? J. Account. Res. 39 (1), 45–74.

Brown, J.R., Gustafson, M.T., Ivanov, I.T., 2021. Weathering cash flow shocks. J.

Finance 76 (4), 1731–1772.

Brown, L.D., Pinello, A.S., 2007. To what extent does the financial reporting process

curb earnings surprise games? J. Account. Res. 45 (5), 947–981.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Eisenbach, T.M., Sannikov, Y., 2012. Macroeconomics with

Financial Frictions: A Survey. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Sannikov, Y., 2014. A macroeconomic model with a financial

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103855.

sector. Amer. Econ. Rev. 104 (2), 379–421.

References

Carhart, M.M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. J. Finance 52 (1),

57–82.

Chae, J., 2005. Trading volume, information asymmetry, and timing information. J.

Finance 60 (1), 413–442.

Ai, H., Li, J.E., Li, K., Schlag, C., 2020. The collateralizability premium. Rev. Financ.

Cooper, M.J., Gulen, H., Schill, M.J., 2008. Asset growth and the cross-section of stock

Stud. 33 (12), 5821–5855.

returns. J. Finance 63 (4), 1609–1651.

Almeida, H., Campello, M., Weisbach, M.S., 2004. The cash flow sensitivity of cash. J.

Cooper, R.W., Haltiwanger, J.C., 2006. On the nature of capital adjustment costs. Rev.

Finance 59 (4), 1777–1804.

Econ. Stud. 73 (3), 611–633.

Altınkılıç, O., Hansen, R.S., 2000. Are there economies of scale in underwriting fees?
Evidence of rising external financing costs. Rev. Financ. Stud. 13 (1), 191–218.
Amihud, Y., 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. J.

Dechow, P.M., Dichev, I.D., 2002. The quality of accruals and earnings: The role of

accrual estimation errors. Account. Rev. 77 (s-1), 35–59.

Dechow, P.M., Sloan, R.G., Sweeney, A.P., 1995. Detecting earnings management.

Financial Mark. 5 (1), 31–56.

Account. Rev. 193–225.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385517W. Hu et al.

Denis, D.J., McKeon, S.B., 2021. Persistent negative cash flows, staged financing, and

Ibbotson, R.G., 1975. Price performance of common stock new issues. J. Financial Econ.

the stockpiling of cash balances. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (1), 293–313.

2 (3), 235–272.

Duchin, R., 2010. Cash holdings and corporate diversification. J. Finance 65 (3),

Iliev, P., 2010. The effect of SOX section 404: Costs, earnings quality, and stock prices.

955–992.

J. Finance 65 (3), 1163–1196.

Eisfeldt, A.L., Muir, T., 2016. Aggregate external financing and savings waves. J.

Jones, J.J., 1991. Earnings management during import relief investigations. J. Account.

Monetary Econ. 84, 116–133.

Res. 29 (2), 193–228.

Eisfeldt, A.L., Papanikolaou, D., 2013. Organization capital and the cross-section of

Kinney, M.R., Trezevant, R.H., 1993. Taxes and the timing of corporate capital

expected returns. J. Finance 68 (4), 1365–1406.

expenditures. J. Am. Tax. Assoc. 15 (2), 40–62.

Eisfeldt, A.L., Rampini, A.A., 2009. Financing shortfalls and the value of aggregate

liquidity. Working paper.

Elenev, V., Landvoigt, T., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. A macroeconomic model
with financially constrained producers and intermediaries. Econometrica 89 (3),
1361–1418.

Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Econ. 105 (2), 211–248.
Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 2019. Liquidity, business cycles, and monetary policy. J. Polit.

Econ. 127 (6), 2926–2966.

Leuz, C., Nanda, D., Wysocki, P.D., 2003. Earnings management and investor protection:

an international comparison. J. Financial Econ. 69 (3), 505–527.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.

Li, D., 2011. Financial constraints, R&D investment, and stock returns. Rev. Financ.

J. Financial Econ. 33 (1), 3–56.

Stud. 24 (9), 2974–3007.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2004. New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates. J. Financial

Li, K., Tsou, C.-Y., 2019. Leasing as a risk-sharing mechanism. Available at SSRN

Econ. 73 (2), 229–269.

3416247.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2005. Financing decisions: who issues stock? J. Financ. Econ.

Lian, C., Ma, Y., 2020. Anatomy of corporate borrowing constraints. Q. J. Econ. 136,

76 (3), 549–582.

229–291.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financial Econ.

Lin, X., Palazzo, B., Yang, F., 2020. The risks of old capital age: Asset pricing

116 (1), 1–22.

Fama, E.F., MacBeth, J.D., 1973. Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests. J. Polit.

Econ. 81 (3), 607–636.

Fan, Y., Barua, A., Cready, W.M., Thomas, W.B., 2010. Managing earnings using
classification shifting: Evidence from quarterly special items. Account. Rev. 85 (4),
1303–1323.

Fang, L.H., 2005. Investment bank reputation and the price and quality of underwriting

services. J. Finance 60 (6), 2729–2761.

Fang, V.W., Huang, A.H., Karpoff, J.M., 2016. Short selling and earnings management:

A controlled experiment. J. Finance 71 (3), 1251–1294.

Francis, J., LaFond, R., Olsson, P.M., Schipper, K., 2004. Costs of equity and earnings

attributes. Account. Rev. 79 (4), 967–1010.

implications of technology adoption. J. Monet. Econ. 115, 145–161.

Lin, X., Zhang, L., 2013. The investment manifesto. J. Monetary Econ. 60 (3), 351–366.
Massa, M., Zhang, B., Zhang, H., 2015. The invisible hand of short selling: Does short
selling discipline earnings management? Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (6), 1701–1736.
McKeon, S.B., 2015. Employee option exercise and equity issuance motives. Available

at SSRN 1920985.

Minton, B.A., Schrand, C., 1999. The impact of cash flow volatility on discretionary
investment and the costs of debt and equity financing. J. Financ. Econ. 54 (3),
423–460.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1986. A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelationconsistent Covariance Matrix. National Bureau of Economic
Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Frankel, R., Levy, H., Shalev, R., 2017. Factors associated with the year-end decline in

Opler, T., Pinkowitz, L., Stulz, R., Williamson, R., 1999. The determinants and

working capital. Manage. Sci. 63 (2), 438–458.

implications of corporate cash holdings. J. Financ. Econ. 52 (1), 3–46.

García-Teruel, P.J., Martínez-Solano, P., Sánchez-Ballesta, J.P., 2014. The role of

Palazzo, B., 2012. Cash holdings, risk, and expected returns. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (1),

accruals quality in the access to bank debt. J. Bank. Financ. 38, 186–193.

162–185.

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2010. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
cycle analysis. In: Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3, Elsevier, pp. 547–599.
Gomes, J., Yamarthy, R., Yaron, A., 2015. Carlstrom and fuerst meets epstein and zin:

Piotroski, J.D., So, E.C., 2012.

in value/glamour
strategies: A fundamental analysis approach. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (9), 2841–2875.
Quadrini, V., 2011. Financial frictions in macroeconomic fluctuations. FRB Richmond

Identifying expectation errors

the asset pricing implications of contracting frictions. Working paper.

Economic Quarterly 97 (3), 209–254.

Grigoris, F., Hu, Y., Segal, G., 2023. Counterparty risk: implications for network linkages

Riddick, L.A., Whited, T.M., 2009. The corporate propensity to save. J. Finance 64 (4),

and asset prices. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (2), 814–858.

1729–1766.

Hadlock, C.J., Pierce, J.R., 2010. New evidence on measuring financial constraints:

Moving beyond the KZ index. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (5), 1909–1940.

Shumway, T., 1997. The delisting bias in CRSP data. J. Finance 52 (1), 327–340.
Sloan, R.G., 1996. Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows

Han, S., Qiu, J., 2007. Corporate precautionary cash holdings. J. Corp. Finance 13 (1),

about future earnings? Account. Rev. 289–315.

43–57.

Teoh, S.H., Zhang, Y., 2011. Data truncation bias, loss firms, and accounting anomalies.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. Amer. Econ. Rev. 103 (2),

Account. Rev. 86 (4), 1445–1475.

732–770.

Warusawitharana, M., Whited, T.M., 2015. Equity market misvaluation, financing, and

Hennessy, C.A., Whited, T.M., 2005. Debt dynamics. J. Finance 60 (3), 1129–1165.
Hennessy, C.A., Whited, T.M., 2007. How costly is external financing? Evidence from

investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (3), 603–654.

Whited, T.M., Wu, G., 2006. Financial constraints risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 19 (2),

a structural estimation. J. Finance 62 (4), 1705–1745.

531–559.

Hirshleifer, D., Hou, K., Teoh, S.H., 2012. The accrual anomaly:

risk or

Xu, Q., Zwick, E., 2020. Tax Policy and Abnormal Investment Behavior. Technical

mispricing? Manage. Sci. 58 (2), 320–335.

Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hirshleifer, D., Teoh, S.H., Yu, J.J., 2011. Short arbitrage, return asymmetry, and the

Zhang, L., 2005. The value premium. J. Finance 60 (1), 67–103.

accrual anomaly. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (7), 2429–2461.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385518