Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Intermediary-based equity term structure✩
Kai Li a,∗, Chenjie Xu b
a Peking University HSBC Business School and PHBS Sargent Institute of Quantitative Economics and Finance, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, 518055, China
b Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Yangpu District, Shanghai, 200433, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We demonstrate that a financial intermediary-based asset pricing model offers a compelling explanation for a
new set of conditional moments of equity term structure and convenience yields. The model’s key mechanism
is that the time-varying tightness of intermediaries’ leverage constraints drives significant mean reversion in
the price of risk. This model guides us in devising a novel empirical methodology to estimate the tightness
of these constraints (i.e., the Relative Tightness Index) from cross-sectional returns of various asset classes.
Our findings affirm that this measure significantly drives the dynamics of equity yield slope and convenience
yields, both empirically and quantitatively.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/74dg25shnt/1

JEL classification:
E2
E3
G12

Keywords:
Equity term structure
Financial intermediary
Mean reversion
Relative tightness index
Discount rate

1. Introduction

In this paper, we study the cyclical variation in the equity term
structure. New empirical facts show that the term structure of equity
yields is highly procyclical – that is, it is positively sloped in expansions
and negatively sloped in recessions – whereas the equity term premium
is countercyclical. Through offering an equity yield decomposition
framework, we decompose the term structure of equity yields into an
equity term premium component and a mean reversion component with
respect to the expected changes in future yields. We show that, in order
to reconcile the seemingly contradictory negative relation between
equity yield curves and the equity term premium, the second mean
reversion component must be strong enough to drive the procyclical
fluctuations in the overall equity yield curve, although the first compo-
nent still remains countercyclical. We propose and demonstrate that a
financial intermediary-based asset pricing model offers a compelling ex-
planation of the cyclical pattern of the equity term structure. Our model
features fast mean reversion of risk prices, driven by time-varying
leverage constraints. Guided by the model implied asset pricing con-
ditions, we develop a novel empirical approach to estimate constraint

tightness from the cross-sectional returns of various asset classes and
show that this measure significantly drives the time-series fluctuation
in the equity yield slope in the data. The estimated constraint tightness
offers valuable insights into the intermediary stochastic discount factor,
serving as a unique bridge between the data and model. Utilizing this
key piece of information, we undertake a rigorous calibration of our
model, demonstrating that intermediaries are a quantitatively plausible
channel to account for equity term structure dynamics. Furthermore,
our model can also generate countercyclical convenience yields that
predict bond risk premium, as documented in Van Binsbergen et al.
(2021).

The literature on the equity term structure has primarily focused
on its unconditional average slope, using the yield or return spread
between long-maturity and short-maturity dividend claims. Neverthe-
less, there is still no consensus regarding whether the unconditional
slope is downward-sloping or upward-sloping (Van Binsbergen et al.,
2012; Van Binsbergen et al., 2013; Bansal et al., 2021). Meanwhile, the
literature has documented robust empirical evidence about the condi-
tional equity term structure. Van Binsbergen et al. (2013) document

✩

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We are grateful to the editor and two anonymous referees for their valuable comments that have helped
improve the manuscript. We thank Hengjie Ai, Jules H. van Binsbergen, Niels Gormsen, Zhiguo He, Wenhao Li (CICF discussant), Yoshio Nozawa, Deniz Okat,
Dimitris Papanikolaou, Jialin Yu, Chu Zhang, Geoffery Zheng (MFA discussant), as well as the conference or seminar participants at CICF, MFA, HKUST and
Peking University. The usual disclaimer applies.

∗ Corresponding author at: Peking University HSBC Business School and PHBS Sargent

Institute of Quantitative Economics and Finance, Nanshan

District, Shenzhen, 518055, China.

E-mail addresses: kaili825@gmail.com (K. Li), chenjiexu101@gmail.com (C. Xu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103856
Received 9 November 2021; Received in revised form 19 April 2024; Accepted 22 April 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103856Availableonline20May20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.K. Li and C. Xu

that the equity yield curve is procyclical; in particular, it is positively
sloped in expansions and negatively sloped in recessions. On the other
hand, Gormsen (2021) documents a countercyclical equity term struc-
ture of holding-period returns, suggesting that price fluctuations are
primarily driven by long-maturity risks, not short-maturity risks.

To reconcile these seemingly contradictory findings, we present a
decomposition framework for equity yields, similar to the term struc-
ture of interest rates literature. Our framework decomposes the equity
yield slope into an equity term premium component and a mean
reversion component concerning expected changes in equity yields.
Despite the countercyclical nature of the equity term premium, the
mean reversion component predominantly drives the procyclical fluc-
tuations in the overall term structure of equity yields. During the 2008
financial crisis, the equity yield curve exhibited a steep downward
slope. This observation might lead to the conjecture that the equity
term premium was significantly negative, causing higher returns for
short-maturity dividends. However, the countercyclical nature of the
equity term premium suggests that long-maturity claims have relatively
high returns in bad times. Our decomposition framework strongly
predicts that the downward sloping equity yield curve in bad times is
a result of the mean reversion component, meaning investors expect
the yields to revert to their means quickly. This insight highlights
the significance of the mean reversion component in reconciling the
seemingly contradictory negative relation between equity yield curves
and the equity term structure.

We propose that financial intermediaries are a quantitatively plau-
sible channel to account for the cyclical patterns of the equity term
structure. We embed a financial intermediary sector with a leverage
constraint into an endowment economy, following Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010). The leverage constraint opens up an endogenous channel of
a countercyclical market price for the consumption shock, therefore
generating a strong enough mean reversion of the risk premium to
reconcile the cyclical pattern of equity term structure. As financial
intermediaries face tighter constraints, the marginal value of net worth
increases and becomes more sensitive to aggregate consumption growth
shocks. This leads to an endogenous increase in the risk price with
constraint tightness at an increasing rate, which is the key to generating
a strong mean reversion effect for the discount rate. During recessions,
when intermediary net worth is low, a slight mean reversion of net
worth causes a significant reduction in risk prices and the risk premium.
Meanwhile, high expected equity returns during these periods facilitate
net worth recovery. In terms of computation, rather than using a log-
linear approximation method, we employ a global method that allows
for occasionally binding constraints to solve the model. This approach
is essential for capturing the nonlinear dynamics in the binding region.
In exploring the relationship between financial intermediaries and
asset prices, we adopt a model-guided approach to estimate the tight-
ness of intermediary leverage constraints. Using a cross-section of asset
returns from He et al. (2017) and proxies for financial intermediary
state variables, we construct a relative tightness index (RT index),
reflecting the marginal value of intermediary net worth. Intriguingly,
this index, despite being estimated from the returns of other asset
classes, exhibits superior explanatory power for the dynamics of the
equity yield slope compared to other variables. Moreover, it provides
key information about the implied intermediary stochastic discount
factor, thus enabling us to rigorously calibrate the intermediary model
to the data and examine its quantitative performance for asset prices.
We demonstrate that our stylized financial intermediary model endoge-
nously generates fruitful implications and performs well in accounting
for both unconditional and conditional moments with respect to the
equity term structure, including a slightly positive unconditional equity
term structure, a procyclical equity yield slope and its sign-switching
feature, and a countercyclical equity term premium.

In addition to explaining the equity term structure, our model
presents insightful implications for the empirical patterns of conve-
nience yields. As a distinct implication from the model, the leverage

constraint effectively introduces a wedge between the interest rates of
loans with different collateralizability, such as interbank loans and gov-
ernment bonds. The interest rate spread widens significantly during a
credit crunch, characterized by a large drop in intermediary net worth.
This pattern is consistent with the evidence that high convenience
yields coincide with low price–dividend ratios and tighter intermediary
constraints. Additionally, because bond risk premiums and convenience
yields share the same risk source in our model, convenience yields can
also predict future excess bond returns, consistent with the empirical
evidence documented in Van Binsbergen et al. (2021).

New facts with respect to the equity term structure have presented
a new testing ground for existing asset pricing models, as emphasized
by Cochrane (2017). We posit that the cyclical pattern of equity yield
slopes imposes a strong discipline on the mean reversion speed in
equity yields for any asset pricing models. According to our decomposi-
tion framework, this mean reversion in equity yields arises from either
the mean reversion of the discount rate or expected dividend growth.
By employing various methods to form dividend growth expectations,
we demonstrate that approximately 50% of the fluctuations in the
equity yield slope can be attributed to shifts in the discount rate
slope. A fast mean reversion of risk prices allows intermediary models
to achieve a procyclical equity yield slope through the discount rate
channel. Nonetheless, in the standard calibration of the long-run risk
model (Bansal and Yaron, 2004) and the habit model (Campbell and
Cochrane, 1999), the mean reversion speed of discount rates is too
slow to account for a procyclical equity yield slope. After incorporating
predictable dividend growth into our baseline model, the extended
version demonstrates an enhanced ability to account for nearly the
entire variation of the equity yield slope.

Our paper is directly linked to the literature on the equity term
structure. Studies by Van Binsbergen et al. (2012), Van Binsbergen
and Koijen (2017) have documented that the term structure is on
average downward-sloping and argue that this is difficult to reconcile
with traditional macro-finance models based on dividend strip data
facts. Recent research suggests that short duration stocks pay a higher
premium than long duration stocks, implying a downward-sloping
equity term structure (Weber, 2018; Gonçalves, 2021b; Gormsen and
Lazarus, 2023). However, other papers have argued that frictions in
derivative markets, such as microstructure noise (Boguth et al., 2012),
taxes (Schulz, 2016), and dealer funding costs (Song, 2016), can explain
the downward-sloping equity term structure. Bansal et al. (2021) argue
that the term structure could be upward-sloping when accounting for
illiquidity and the lack of representativeness in the short sample. Giglio
et al. (2023) estimate a rich affine model using the cross-section of
equity returns and find that the model-implied equity term struc-
ture is mildly upward-sloping. Gonçalves (2021a) document a hump-
shaped term structure and use reinvestment risk to rationalize the
term structure patterns. The more robust empirical evidence is about
the conditional equity term structure — that is, a procyclical equity
yield slope and a countercyclical equity term premium. To understand
this seemingly contradictory evidence, we decompose the equity yield
slope into an equity term premium component and a mean reversion
component. While Gormsen (2021) focuses on the countercyclical term
premium, our paper highlights the dominant role of the procyclical
mean reversion component in driving the overall equity yield slope.
We further demonstrate that a fast mean reversion speed is essential
for a model to fit the data.

In addition to the equity term structure literature, our paper is
also connected to several strands of literature. First, this paper is
related to the theoretical literature on intermediary frictions. The two
broad classes of theories are leverage-constraint theories (Geanakoplos
and Fostel, 2008; Adrian and Shin, 2010; Brunnemeier and Pedersen,
2009; Danielsson et al., 2011; Geanakoplos, 2012; Adrian and Bo-
yarchenko, 2012; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2014; Maggiori, 2017; Ai
et al., 2020) and equity risk-capital constraints theories (He and Kr-
ishnamurthy, 2013; Brunnemeier and Pedersen, 2009). Both theo-
ries begin with the assumption that intermediaries are constrained

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038562K. Li and C. Xu

in raising more equity. They share two common predictions: first,
intermediary equity (or net worth) is the key state variable that affects
asset prices; second, the effect of intermediary equity on asset prices
is nonlinear, with a larger effect when intermediary equity is low. The
aim of our paper diverges from the theoretical literature that introduces
alternative microfoundations for financial frictions. Instead, we focus
on the quantitative asset pricing implication of an intermediary model
with a stylized leverage constraint, as described in Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010). Our paper contributes by introducing a novel measure of
constraint tightness, thereby bridging the gap between the theoreti-
cal model and empirical data. Additionally, we explore the model’s
performance in explaining equity yields and convenience yields.

Second, this paper connects to the literature investigating the re-
lationship between intermediary balance sheets and asset prices (Hu
et al., 2013; Adrian et al., 2014; He et al., 2017; Haddad and Sraer,
2020; Haddad and Muir, 2021; Du et al., 2023). Closely related to
our work, Adrian et al. (2014) and He et al. (2017) demonstrate that
shocks to intermediary state variables, such as the leverage of securities
broker–dealers and the equity capital ratio of financial intermediaries,
effectively price equity and various other asset classes. Haddad and
Muir (2021) show that the financial health of intermediaries has rela-
tively more predictability for asset classes that are more intermediated.
Despite these significant advancements in understanding the relation-
ship between intermediary state variables and asset prices, there is an
ongoing debate about which specific state variable serves as the optimal
indicator of intermediaries’ financial health. Furthermore, the ques-
tion of whether intermediary leverage is procyclical or countercyclical
remains unsolved. Rather than directly using one of these measures,
we adopt a model-guided approach and leverage the intermediary
state variables from existing literature to estimate the time series of
intermediary constraint tightness. We show that the estimated index
exhibits a strong relationship with equity yields in dividend futures
markets, which are dominated by sophisticated institutional investors.
Lastly, this paper is linked to the literature on financial intermedia-
tion and interest rate spreads (Bartolini et al., 2011; Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012; Nagel, 2016; Van Binsbergen et al., 2021; Di-
amond and Van Tassel, 2021; He et al., 2022; Krishnamurthy and
Li, 2023). Directly related to our work, Van Binsbergen et al. (2021)
measure convenience yield by using the difference between the option-
implied risk-free rate and the government bond rate. They find the
convenience yield to be countercyclical and able to predict bond excess
returns, whereas its term structure slope remains acyclical. Our paper
contributes by providing a coherent framework to rationalize these
empirical findings.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces our decomposition framework for equity yield curves and
presents evidence on the cyclical pattern of the equity term structure.
In Section 3, we describe our financial intermediary asset pricing model
and discuss its implications for equity yields and convenience yields.
Section 4 estimates the tightness of the intermediary constraint and
investigates its connection to asset prices. In Section 5, we use the
estimated constraint tightness to guide our calibration and evaluate the
quantitative performance of our model. In Section 6, we decompose
the variation of equity yield slope into the discount rate channel and
expected dividend growth channel, and extend our baseline model
with predictable dividend growth. Finally, Section 7 offers concluding
remarks. The Internet Appendix provides details on model derivations,
data sources, and computational methods.

2. An equity yield curve decomposition approach

In this section, we introduce a decomposition framework, which
is analogous to the term structure of interest rate literature, for in-
stance, Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), to better understand the de-
terminants of the yield slope. Specifically, we decompose the term
structure slope of the (forward) equity yield into two components: an

equity term premium component, linked to the term structure slope of
the risk premium, and a mean reversion component in relation to the
expected change in (forward) equity yields. Our analysis demonstrates
that, while the term structure slopes of (forward) equity yields and
dividend strip returns share the same information unconditionally, the
determinants of these two term structure slopes differ significantly
conditionally. Notably, we observe that the equity term premium is
countercyclical, whereas expected changes in equity yields are strongly
procyclical. Moreover, the expected change component dominates the
term premium component, leading to a procyclical equity yield slope.
Gormsen (2021) also decomposes the equity yield slope into the
equity term premium and expected change components, albeit in a
different way.1 His paper emphasizes the countercyclical equity term
premium, whereas our study highlights the procyclical expected change
in yields. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to
employ an accounting identity to decompose the equity yield slope and
examine its implications for general equilibrium models. We propose
that, in order to fit the empirical dynamics of equity yields, these
models should incorporate a strong mean reversion mechanism.

2.1. Dividend strips

In this subsection, we introduce the concept and notations of divi-
dend strips, following the notation of Van Binsbergen et al. (2013). We
denote 𝑃𝑛,𝑡 as the time 𝑡 price of a claim on dividend at time 𝑡 + 𝑛. Such
a claim is often called the ‘‘dividend strip’’ or ‘‘zero-coupon equity’’.

The one-period log return on the dividend strip, 𝑟𝑛,𝑡+1, is defined as
the return from buying a maturity-𝑛 dividend strip at time 𝑡 at the price
of 𝑃𝑛,𝑡 and selling it as a maturity-(𝑛 − 1) dividend strip at time 𝑡 + 1 at
the price of 𝑃𝑛−1,𝑡+1. Specifically, 𝑟𝑛,𝑡+1 = ln

)

.

( 𝑃𝑛−1,𝑡+1
𝑃𝑛,𝑡

We denote the stochastic dividend paid out in 𝑛 years from today’s
date 𝑡 as 𝐷𝑡+𝑛. The equity yield at time 𝑡 with maturity 𝑛 is then defined
as

𝑒𝑛,𝑡

≡ 1
𝑛

ln

)

( 𝐷𝑡
𝑃𝑛,𝑡

= 𝑦𝑛,𝑡 + 𝜃𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑔𝑑
𝑛,𝑡.

(1)

Eq. (1) shows that the equity yield can be expressed as the sum of three
components: the maturity-𝑛 nominal bond yield (𝑦𝑛,𝑡), the average risk
premium that investors require for holding a maturity-𝑛 dividend strip
(𝜃𝑛,𝑡), and the expected average log dividend growth rate over the next
𝑛 years

[
ln

)])

(

.

𝑛,𝑡 = 1
𝑔𝑑

𝑛

𝐸𝑡

In practice, contracts on dividend strips are quoted in futures prices.
An index dividend future is an agreement in which, at maturity, the
buyer pays the futures price 𝐹𝑛,𝑡, determined today, and in exchange,
the seller pays the dollar amount of dividends 𝐷𝑡+𝑛. By no arbitrage, the
futures price is 𝐹𝑛,𝑡 = 𝑃𝑛,𝑡 exp(𝑛𝑦𝑛,𝑡). The forward equity yield, denoted
as 𝑒𝑓

𝑛,𝑡, can be expressed in terms of the dividend futures price:

( 𝐷𝑡+𝑛
𝐷𝑡

𝑒𝑓
𝑛,𝑡

≡ 1
𝑛

ln

)

( 𝐷𝑡
𝐹𝑛,𝑡

= 𝜃𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑔𝑑
𝑛,𝑡.

(2)

The literature on the equity term structure has debated whether it is
unconditionally downward-sloping (Van Binsbergen et al., 2013; Van Bins-
bergen and Koijen, 2017) or upward-sloping (Bansal et al., 2021).
However, regardless of this debate, clear cyclical patterns have been
documented in the term structure slopes. Specifically, Van Binsbergen
et al. (2013) and Bansal et al. (2021) find that the term structure
slope of equity yields, 𝑒𝑛,𝑡, is procyclical, whereas Gormsen (2021)
shows that the term structure slope of dividend strip returns, 𝑟𝑛,𝑡+1, is
countercyclical.

To reconcile this seemingly contradictory empirical evidence, we
provide a decomposition method in the following sections to clarify

1 The expected change component in our framework represents the one-
period expected change in yields, making it more straightforward to interpret
and identify.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038563K. Li and C. Xu

the relationship between the term structure slope of equity yields and
dividend strip returns. Additionally, we discuss the economic forces
that drive the unconditional and conditional term structure slopes.

Similarly, the term structure slope of forward equity yields can be
decomposed into an equity term premium component and an expected
changes in yields component:

2.2. Decomposing the equity yield

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡 =

The expected one-period dividend strip return consists of two com-

𝑛
∑

)

1
(𝜉𝑖,𝑡 − 𝜉1,𝑡
𝑛
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
equity term premium

𝑖=1

+

𝑛
∑

)

(𝑖 − 1)

[
𝐸𝑡

(
𝑒𝑓
𝑖−1,𝑡+1

1
𝑛
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected change in forward equity yields

− 𝑒𝑓

𝑖−1,𝑡

𝑖=1

]

.

(8)

ponents:

𝐸𝑡(𝑟𝑛,𝑡+1) = 𝜉𝑛,𝑡 + 𝜁𝑛,𝑡,

(3)

Proof. See Internet Appendix A.2. □

in which 𝜉𝑛,𝑡 is a maturity-𝑛 equity risk premium and 𝜁𝑛,𝑡 is the expected
return on a zero-coupon bond with the same maturity.

Furthermore, the slope of dividend strip returns from maturity 𝑚 to

𝑛 can be described by the following equation:

𝐸𝑡(𝑟𝑛,𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1) =

𝜉𝑛,𝑡 − 𝜉𝑚,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
equity term premium

+

𝜁𝑛,𝑡 − 𝜁𝑚,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
bond term premium

.

(4)

Eq. (4) highlights the fact that the term premium from equity and bonds
determines the slope of dividend strip returns. In Internet Appendix
A.1, we provide a detailed derivation of the corresponding terms for
the equity term premium in the fundamental pricing equation. We also
examine the implications of leading asset pricing models for the equity
term premium.

Since dividend strip returns are one-period returns, their term struc-
ture slope is determined solely by the difference in their riskiness. In
contrast, equity yields represent expected returns over different hori-
zons, meaning their term structure slope reflects not only differences in
riskiness but also expected changes in riskiness over time. To illustrate
this point, we can draw parallels to bond yields Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) and represent long-maturity equity yields as a combination of
expected short-term equity yields and a term premium. This idea is
captured in Proposition 1.

Proposition 1. The equity yield can be represented as expected short-term
yields plus a term premium:
)

𝑒𝑛,𝑡 =

(𝑛−1
∑

𝐸𝑡

𝑒1,𝑡+𝑖

1
𝑛
𝑖=0
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected short-term equity yield

[𝑛−1
∑

+

𝐸𝑡

(𝜉𝑛−𝑖,𝑡+𝑖 − 𝜉1,𝑡+𝑖 + 𝜁𝑛−𝑖,𝑡+𝑖 − 𝜁1,𝑡+𝑖

1
𝑛
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
term premium

𝑖=0

]
)

.

(5)

Similarly, the forward equity yield can be represented as expected

short-term forward yields plus an equity term premium:

(𝑛−1
∑

)

[𝑛−1
∑

𝑒𝑓
𝑛,𝑡 =

𝐸𝑡

1
𝑛
𝑖=0
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected short-term forward equity yield

𝑒𝑓
1,𝑡+𝑖

+

𝐸𝑡

(𝜉𝑛−𝑖,𝑡+𝑖 − 𝜉1,𝑡+𝑖

1
𝑛
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
equity term premium

𝑖=0

]
)

.

(6)

Moreover, we can decompose the term structure slope of both equity
yields and forward equity yields into a term premium component and
an expected changes in yields component.

Proposition 2. The term structure slope of equity yields can be decom-
posed into a term premium component and an expected changes in yields
component:

𝑒𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒1,𝑡 =

𝑛
∑

)

[(𝜉𝑖,𝑡 − 𝜉1,𝑡

1
𝑛
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
term premium

(𝜁𝑖,𝑡 − 𝜁1,𝑡

𝑖=1

)]

+

+

𝑛
∑

)

[𝐸𝑡

(𝑖 − 1)

(𝑒𝑖−1,𝑡+1

1
𝑛
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected changes in equity yields

− 𝑒𝑖−1,𝑡

𝑖=1

]

.

(7)

Proposition 2 reveals that the equity yield slope not only reflects the
term premium but also provides information about expected changes
in equity yields. In the following analysis, we show that the expected
changes component does not affect yield slopes unconditionally, but is
key in resolving the discrepancy between the cyclical patterns of strip
return slopes and equity yield slopes.

2.2.1. Unconditional term structure

Eq. (7) provides insight into the unconditional expectation of the
equity yield slope. By taking an expectation of the equation, we obtain
the following expression:

𝐸(𝑒𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒1,𝑡) =

1
𝑛

𝑛
∑

𝑖=1

𝐸 [(𝜉𝑖,𝑡 − 𝜉1,𝑡

)

+

(𝜁𝑖,𝑡 − 𝜁1,𝑡

)] .

(9)

Comparing this equation with the unconditional term structure slope
of the dividend strip return given by Eq. (4), we find that they share
the same information. In fact, the unconditional slope of the equity
yield is a weighted average of the dividend strip return slope. Since
equity yields are typically less affected by liquidity issues than holding
period returns (Bansal et al., 2021), they can serve as a better target
for examining the unconditional property of the term structure slope
of the risk premium.

2.2.2. Conditional term structure

The literature documents a seemingly contradictory pattern: a coun-
tercyclical equity term premium and a procyclical equity yield curve.
However, this discrepancy can be resolved through the decomposition
relation outlined in Proposition 2. Specifically, this proposition shows
that the conditional term structure slope equals the conditional equity
term premium plus the expected changes in equity yields going for-
ward. If the expected changes component is strongly procyclical and
dominates the effect from the variation in the equity term premium,
a countercyclical equity term premium and a procyclical equity yield
slope can coexist.

The cyclical pattern of the equity term premium and equity yield
slope imposes a strong discipline on the mean reversion speed of equity
yields. In recessions, the short-maturity equity yield exceeds the long-
term yield, not because short-maturity dividend strips earn higher
risk premiums than long-maturity strips, but because equity yields are
expected to decrease at a rapid pace that surpasses the upward-sloping
tendency induced by the term premium.

2.3. Dynamics of the equity yield curve: Empirical evidence

To investigate the driving force behind the equity yield slope, we
conduct a series of empirical tests, drawing on the framework outlined
in Proposition 2. Our analysis reveals that, despite the equity term pre-
mium being countercyclical, the procyclical mean reversion component
exerts a stronger effect, thereby causing the overall equity yield slope
to be procyclical.

First, we examine the cyclicality of the equity yield slope by regress-
ing the difference between long- and short-maturity forward equity
yields on the contemporaneous dividend-price ratio of the stock index:

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1(𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡.

(10)

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038564K. Li and C. Xu

Table 1
Equity term structure: Stylized facts.

S&P500

EuroStoxx50

Nikkei225

Panel

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2
Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2
Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2
Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

𝐸(𝑒𝑓

5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
1,𝑡)

0.012
(0.018)
147

0.000
(0.021)
147

−0.003
(0.021)
147

0.003
(0.012)
441

𝛼1

−0.426
(0.050)
147
0.78
−0.318
(0.061)
147
0.67
−0.103
(0.074)
147
0.11
−0.220
(0.061)
441
0.37

𝛽1

0.169
(0.120)
135
0.05
0.148
(0.161)
135
0.03
0.184
(0.120)
135
0.07
0.169
(0.085)
405
0.05

𝛾1

−0.598
(0.129)
135
0.44
−0.466
(0.199)
135
0.22
−0.293
(0.161)
135
0.13
−0.395
(0.119)
405
0.20

𝜃1

0.992
(0.347)
135
0.29
1.603
(0.314)
135
0.39
1.391
(0.273)
135
0.28
1.378
(0.193)
405
0.32

This table shows the average term structure slope of forward equity yields and the regression results. We run the following four regressions:

1,𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1(𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡,

𝑖=1

∑5

5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓
(
𝑖,𝑡+12 − 𝑟𝑓
𝑟𝑓
1
5
(
𝑒𝑓
𝑖−1,𝑡+12 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑖=1(𝑖 − 1)
(
𝑖−1,𝑡+12 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡+12

𝑖−1,𝑡

𝑖=1(𝑖 − 1)

∑5

1
5
∑5

)

𝑖−1,𝑡
)

1
5

= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1(𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+12,
)

= 𝛾0 + 𝛾1(𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+12,
5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+12,

= 𝜃0 + 𝜃1(𝑒𝑓

𝑛,𝑡+12 is the 12-month ahead return to an n-year dividend futures contract, 𝑒𝑓

in which 𝑟𝑓
𝑛,𝑡+12 is the 12-month ahead n-year forward equity yield,
and (𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡) is the dividend-to-price ratio of the stock index. All the results are based on monthly rolling regressions. The maturity is measured
in years. Standard errors are Newey–West corrected with 12 lags. Equity yields and strip returns are based on S&P 500, Euro Stoxx 50, and
Nikkei 225 index dividend futures contracts. The data cover the period from December 2004 to February 2017.

Second, we investigate the cyclicality of the equity term premium
by regressing the realized return difference between long- and short-
maturity dividend strip returns on the ex-ante dividend-price ratio of
the stock index:

1
𝑛

𝑛
∑

𝑖=1

(
𝑖,𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓
𝑟𝑓

1,𝑡+1

)

= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1(𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡+1,

(11)

in which 𝑟𝑓
future.

𝑖,𝑡+1 denotes the one-period return on a maturity-𝑖 dividend

Third, we regress the realized changes in equity yields on the

ex-ante dividend price ratio of the stock index:

1
𝑛

𝑛
∑

(𝑖 − 1)

(

𝑖=1

𝑖−1,𝑡+1 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

𝑖−1,𝑡

)

= 𝛾0 + 𝛾1(𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡+1,

(12)

in which the left-hand variable is a weighted average of realized
changes in equity yields, which serves as an empirical proxy for the
expected changes in yields in Eq. (8).

Lastly, we run an expectation hypothesis regression:

1
𝑛

𝑛
∑

(𝑖 − 1)

(

𝑖=1

𝑖−1,𝑡+1 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

𝑖−1,𝑡

)

= 𝜃0 + 𝜃1(𝑒𝑓

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡+1,

(13)

which solely relies on an accounting identity decomposition to study
the relationship between equity yields and the term premium in a
model-free framework. Eq. (13) captures this relationship. If the equity
yield slope is purely driven by the expected changes in future yields,
then the expectation hypothesis holds, and the regression coefficient
̂𝜃1 = 1. However, we expect the expectation hypothesis to fail because
the equity term premium also fluctuates over time. The relation be-
tween equity yields and the term premium can be inferred from the
regression coefficient ̂𝜃1. Combining the decomposition Eq. (8) and
regression Eq. (13) gives (suppressing the constant)

1
𝑛

𝑛
∑

𝑖=1

(𝜉𝑖,𝑡 − 𝜉1,𝑡

)

= (1 − ̂𝜃1)(𝑒𝑓

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡),

(14)

which reveals whether equity yields move by more or less than sug-
gested by the expectation hypothesis. If ̂𝜃1 > 1, the effect from expected
changes dominates the equity term premium, leading to a negative
relation between the equity yield slope and the term premium. If ̂𝜃1 <
1, the equity yield slope and term premium are positively related. If

0 < ̂𝜃1 < 1, it indicates that the equity term premium and expected
changes work in the same direction, whereas if ̂𝜃1 < 0, then the equity
term premium and expected changes work in the opposite direction,
and the effect from the term premium dominates.

Our results are based on S&P 500, Euro Stoxx 50, and Nikkei 225
dividend futures contracts. The data cover the period from December
2004 to February 2017 and are provided by a major financial institu-
tion that is active in dividend strips markets.2 We use the mid-prices
of the dividend strip contracts on the last trading day of the month to
calculate equity yields and returns.

Table 1 shows the average equity yield slope and regression results
in the data. We report the sample averages of the equity yield difference
between 5-year and 1-year dividend futures as well as the monthly
regression coefficients of Eqs. (10)–(13). The standard errors are Newey
and West (1987) corrected for 12 lags.

We make several observations from the table: First, the signs of
the unconditional equity yield slope vary across countries and are
insignificant from zero, consistent with the literature about the debate
over the sign of the unconditional slope. Second, the equity yield slope
is robustly procyclical and predominantly driven by the mean reversion
component.

The first column shows the average 5-year minus 1-year equity yield
slope across different countries. It is positive for the U.S. and Europe
but negative for Japan. However, the large standard errors for these
estimates make them statistically insignificant from zero.

The cyclicality patterns of the equity yield slope and equity term
premium are remarkably consistent across countries. First, all the re-
gression coefficients for Eq. (10) are negative, suggesting a procyclical
equity yield slope. Second, estimates from Eq. (11) show that ex-
ante dividend-price ratios positively predict future return differences
between long- and short-maturity dividend strips, indicating a coun-
tercyclical equity term premium. Third, the significantly negative esti-
mates of Eq. (12) imply that expected changes in yields are procyclical.
Lastly, and most importantly, the expectation hypothesis regression
(13) suggests that equity yields move by less than what the expectation

2 We would like to extend our sincere thanks to Dr. Ravi Bansal for
generously sharing the dividend strip data from his work referenced in Bansal
et al. (2021). His contribution has been invaluable to our analysis.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038565K. Li and C. Xu

Fig. 1. Relative Tightness Index and Equity Yield Slope.
Panel A shows the time series of the RT index (standardized). Panel B displays the realized and fitted term structure slope of forward equity yields. The realized slope is measured
as the difference between 5-year and 1-year forward equity yields. The fitted slope values are obtained by estimating a linear regression using the equation

5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡 = 𝜙0 + 𝜙1𝑅𝑇𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡.

Here, 𝑅𝑇𝑡 refers to the relative tightness index, and 𝑒𝑓
estimated equity yield slope from Giglio et al. (2023) as an out-of-sample test. The shaded areas in the figures indicate NBER recessions.

1,𝑡 represent forward equity yields from S&P 500 index dividend futures contracts. Additionally, we include the

5,𝑡 and 𝑒𝑓

hypothesis proposes. Specifically, the point estimate for the U.S. is
close to one, indicating that the fluctuation in the equity yield slope is
primarily driven by expected changes in equity yields. The regression
coefficients of the other two countries are both well above one.

In summary, this empirical evidence presents a coherent narrative
that the equity term premium and expected changes in yields move
in opposite directions, with the effect from expected changes being
considerably greater and dominating equity term premium fluctuations.
During recessions, long-maturity dividend strips become riskier, caus-
ing the equity yield curve to be positively sloped. However, investors
also anticipate that high equity yields will revert to their means, leading
to downward-sloping yield curves. The empirical evidence suggests that
the mean-reversion speed of equity yields must be fast enough for the
second effect to prevail, resulting in procyclical equity yield slopes.

3. An intermediary-based asset pricing model

3.1. Motivation

Intermediary asset pricing models provide a potential explanation
for the observed dynamics of the term structure of the equity yield.
Several key aspects of these models align with the observed behav-
ior, which further motivates our study of the equity term structure
implications of a financial intermediary model.

First, a critical feature of intermediary asset pricing models is the
presence of a strongly mean-reverting price of risk, particularly during
adverse economic conditions. These models exhibit high nonlinearities
in the price of risk (e.g., the risk premium ‘‘spikes’’ when constraints
become binding) and strong mean reversion in such states. This mean
reversion arises because high risk premia combined with leverage tend
to quickly increase net worth, resulting in a lower price of risk in future
states.

Second, the dividend future markets examined in this study are
likely dominated by sophisticated financial institutions, which are pre-
cisely the entities for which intermediary asset pricing theories are
expected to apply. This is consistent with the models’ assumptions, as
the typical household is unlikely to engage in trading dividend futures.
Third, we observe that the model-based estimate of intermediary
constraint tightness is closely related to the equity yield slope. In Sec-
tion 4, we use a model-guided approach to construct a relative tightness
index (RT index) that measures the marginal value of banks’ net worth.
Fig. 1 displays both the realized term structure slope of forward equity
yields and a fitted curve from a simple univariate linear regression
with the RT index as the explanatory variable. It is noteworthy that
we did not use the information about the term structure of the equity
yield when measuring the RT index. Nevertheless, the fitted curve
closely aligns with the observed term structure dynamics, further sup-
porting the applicability of financial intermediary asset pricing models
in explaining the term structure of the equity yield. We also plot the

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038566K. Li and C. Xu

estimated equity yield slope from Giglio et al. (2023) as an out-of-
sample test. Although the estimation method and data source of the
two fitted series differ significantly, the results in terms of equity term
structures are similar in both level and dynamics.

Motivated by these observations, we first present our model setup in
Section 3.2. Following that, Section 3.3 detail the pricing mechanisms
of the model. Building on this, we further explore the implications of
our model on the term structure of equity yields and convenience yields
in Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.

3.2. Model setup

We incorporate a financial intermediary sector with a leverage
constraint, as described by Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), into a stan-
dard Lucas (1978) endowment economy. The economy consists of three
sectors: households, financial intermediaries (banks), and non-financial
firms.

The Non-financial Firms. Time is discrete and infinite, with 𝑡 =
0, 1, 2, …. The non-financial firms in this economy follow a Lucas (1978)
tree model, paying aggregate output every period, denoted as 𝑌𝑡. The
growth rate of the output process, 𝑔𝑡+1, is given by

𝑔𝑡+1 =

𝑌𝑡+1
𝑌𝑡

= exp

(𝜇𝑦 + 𝜎𝜀𝑦,𝑡+1

) ,

(15)

where 𝜀𝑦,𝑡+1 follows an i.i.d. standard normal distribution, and the
parameter 𝜎 captures the aggregate consumption volatility. The price
of the Lucas tree at period 𝑡 is denoted as 𝑄𝑡, and the total return on
the Lucas tree, 𝑅𝑏,𝑡+1, is defined as 𝑅𝑏,𝑡+1 =

.

𝑄𝑡+1+𝑌𝑡+1
𝑄𝑡

Households. A unit mass of identical households make intertempo-
ral consumption and saving decisions. The household is infinitely lived
and endowed with recursive utility, as in Epstein and Zin (1989):

(1 − 𝛽)𝐶

1− 1
𝜓
𝑡

(

+ 𝛽

𝐸𝑡[𝑈 1−𝛾
𝑡+1 ]

𝑈𝑡 =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

1− 1
𝜓
1−𝛾

)

1
1− 1
𝜓

,

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

(16)

in which 𝐶𝑡 is period-𝑡 consumption, 𝛾 is the risk aversion parameter,
and 𝜓 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Households cannot
invest directly in the risky asset market but can only save through bank
deposits. Furthermore, households own the entire banking sector.3

Financial Intermediaries. A bank utilizes its net worth and de-
posits raised from households to invest in the equity of the firms. At
period 𝑡, the bank starts with net worth 𝑛𝑡 and chooses to hold 𝑠𝑏
𝑡 shares
of stock. To finance the purchase of the stock, the bank must borrow
𝑠𝑏
𝑡 𝑄𝑡−𝑛𝑡 from the household, denoted as 𝑏𝑡. The flow-of-funds constraint
is given by

𝑠𝑏
𝑡 𝑄𝑡 = 𝑛𝑡 + 𝑏𝑡.

(17)

The law of motion of the bank’s net worth is described by Eq. (18):

𝑛𝑡+1 = 𝑠𝑏

𝑡 (𝑄𝑡+1 + 𝑌𝑡+1) − 𝑏𝑡𝑅𝑡.

(18)

At period 𝑡 + 1, the bank receives 𝑄𝑡+1 + 𝑌𝑡+1 from each share of the
Lucas tree and repays 𝑏𝑡 of the loan to the household at a fixed rate ̄𝑅𝑡.
The deposit rate ̄𝑅𝑡 is determined by the households’ Euler equation:

(

𝐸𝑡

𝑀𝑡+1𝑅𝑡

)

= 1.

(19)

Banks are subject to a participation constraint, motivated by a

limited enforcement argument in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010):

𝑉𝑡

≥ 𝜃𝑠𝑏

𝑡 𝑄𝑡,

(20)

where 𝑉𝑡 represents the discounted value of payoffs from operating
honestly, and 𝜃 is the fraction of assets a banker can divert. As we

3 To motivate a limited enforcement argument later, it is best to think of

banks as only obtaining deposits from households who do not own them.

discuss in detail in Internet Appendix B.3, the participation constraint
can be interpreted as a leverage constraint or a collateral constraint.
Because of this financial constraint, banks may seek to accumulate cash
to overcome the constraint. To prevent this, we assume that in each
period, a 𝜆 fraction of banks are forced to liquidate.

The bank maximizes its franchise value 𝑉𝑡 subject to four constraints
(17), (18), (19), and (20). Specifically, the problem can be written
recursively as:

𝑉𝑡 = max
𝑠𝑏
𝑡

{𝑀𝑡+1

[𝜆𝑛𝑡+1 + (1 − 𝜆)𝑉𝑡+1

]} .

𝐸𝑡

(21)

The right-hand side of the equation indicates that in the event of
liquidation, the bank receives its net worth 𝑛𝑡+1; if it does not liquidate,
it continues to operate with a franchise value of 𝑉𝑡+1. Due to the
homogeneity of the value function, the bank’s franchise value can be
expressed as 𝑉𝑡 = 𝑛𝑡𝜇𝑡, where 𝜇𝑡 represents the marginal value of the
bank’s net worth.

Aggregation of Bank Net Worth. Aggregating across banks, we can
obtain the evolution of aggregate bank net worth. In equilibrium, the
banking sector holds all risky assets. Thus, the aggregate bank holding
of the Lucas tree is 𝑆𝑏
𝑡 = 1. From the flow-of-funds constraint (17), we
have 𝑄𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡 + 𝐵𝑡, where 𝑁𝑡 is the aggregate bank net worth and 𝐵𝑡 is
the aggregate debt.

In each period, the household uses a 𝛿 fraction of the Lucas tree
to set up new banks, as assumed in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). The
aggregate net worth of old banks next period is the value of the Lucas
tree minus the promised debt repayment. The evolution of aggregate
bank net worth can be summarized as:
(𝑄𝑡 − 𝑁𝑡

[(𝑄𝑡+1 + 𝑌𝑡+1

𝑁𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜆)

+ 𝛿𝑄𝑡+1.

) 𝑅𝑡+1

(22)

−

)

]

{𝑄𝑡, ̄𝑅𝑡

Competitive Equilibrium. A competitive equilibrium is a collec-
}∞
tion of prices,
𝑡=0 that satisfy the
following: (1) household utility maximization; (2) the maximization of
banks’ franchise values; (3) market clearing conditions; and (4) a set of
consistency conditions.

}∞
𝑡=0, and quantities

𝑡 , 𝑁𝑡, 𝐵𝑡

{𝑆𝑏

In this economy, a pivotal component is the aggregate net worth
of the banking sector, which plays a vital role in determining the
slackness of the financial constraint and, in turn, the equilibrium prices.
A comprehensive discussion on the model and detailed derivations of
the equations can be found in Internet Appendix B. We define the
bank net worth share as the aggregate net worth divided by the total
asset value, ̂𝑛𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡
. This bank net worth share is important to our
𝑄𝑡
analysis, and we demonstrate that a Markov equilibrium exists with
̂𝑛𝑡 as a state variable. Further elaboration on the model solution and
the construction of the Markov equilibrium is available in Internet
Appendix C.

As in Li and Xu (2023), we adopt a global method that accounts
for occasionally binding constraints when solving the model, instead
of using a log-linear approximation method. This approach effectively
captures the nonlinear dynamics in the binding region, which is crucial
for generating a fast mean reversion speed of risk prices.

Asset Markets. Suppose there is a retail interbank market where the
banks can trade Arrow–Debreu securities among themselves. Following
the approach of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Bansal and Yaron
(2004), we model aggregate consumption and aggregate dividend as
two distinct processes. Specifically, the log growth rate of aggregate
dividend is defined as
)

= 𝜇𝑑 + 𝜑𝜎𝜀𝑦,𝑡+1 + 𝜑𝑑 𝜎𝜀𝑑,𝑡+1,

(23)

log

( 𝐷𝑡+1
𝐷𝑡

where 𝜀𝑦,𝑡+1 represents the consumption shock, and 𝜀𝑑,𝑡+1 denotes the
dividend growth shock, uncorrelated with the consumption growth
shock. Both shocks are i.i.d. standard normally distributed. The addi-
tional parameters 𝜑 > 1 and 𝜑𝑑 > 1 allow us to match the overall
volatility of dividends, which is greater than that of consumption in the
data, and its correlation with consumption. We use 𝑄𝑑,𝑡 to represent
the price of the dividend claim, and the market return is defined as
𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1 =

.

𝑄𝑑,𝑡+1+𝐷𝑡+1
𝑄𝑑,𝑡

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038567K. Li and C. Xu

3.3. Asset pricing implications

3.3.2. Equity term structure

3.3.1. Equity market

In this section, we offer insights into the model mechanism respon-
sible for generating asset price dynamics. Assets traded in the interbank
market should be priced using the banks’ stochastic discount factor, as
outlined in Lemma 1.

Lemma 1. The returns, 𝑅𝑡+1, for any assets that financial intermediaries
can trade among themselves, including 𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1 and 𝑅𝑦,𝑡+1, must satisfy
𝐸 [𝑀𝑡+1
in which

{𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1

} 𝑅𝑡+1

= 𝛺𝑡,

(24)

]

𝐸 [𝑀𝑡+1

𝛺𝑡 =

We use 𝑀 𝐹 𝐼

}]

{𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1
]
𝐸 [𝑀𝑡+1
𝑡+1 to denote the ‘‘augmented stochastic discount factor’’

+ 𝛾𝑡𝜃.

(25)

implied by the bank’s optimization problem,

𝑀 𝐹 𝐼

𝑡+1 = 𝑀𝑡+1

𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1
𝛺𝑡

.

(26)

This factor can price all assets traded among banks. In addition to 𝑀𝑡+1,
the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of consumption, 𝑀 𝐹 𝐼
𝑡+1
also depends on an additional component, 𝛷𝑡+1, which is defined as

𝛷𝑡+1 =

𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1
𝛺𝑡

.

(27)

The term 𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1 is a measure of the shadow price of net
worth for the next period, which is a weighted average of the marginal
value of net worth, depending on whether or not the bank is forced
to liquidate. 𝛺𝑡 can be interpreted as the risk-adjusted present value
of investing one unit of net worth for one period. Thus, we can think
of the second component, 𝛷𝑡+1, as the shadow price appreciation from
period 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1, and the augmented stochastic discount factor can be
interpreted as the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution concern-
ing an additional unit of net worth. Here, 𝑀 𝐹 𝐼
𝑡+1 depends not only on
household consumption but also on intermediary equity capital. The
banker dislikes assets with low returns when aggregate consumption is
low and when the financial intermediary has low net worth.

The participation constraint (20) is essential for generating the
financial accelerating effect. Without this constraint, the marginal value
of bank net worth, 𝜇𝑡, would always equal 1. To the extent that an
additional unit of net worth relaxes the participation constraint or
reduces the possibility of a binding constraint in the future, 𝜇𝑡 will
generally exceed unity. Panel A of Fig. 2 shows the marginal value of
a bank’s net worth, 𝜇𝑡, as a function of bank net worth share ̂𝑛. The
marginal value of net worth increases as the bank’s net worth decreases.
Moreover, the marginal value becomes highly sensitive to changes in
net worth as adverse fundamental shocks hit the banking sector in the
binding region, ̂𝑛 ≤ ̂𝑛𝑏.

The nonlinear sensitivity of the marginal value of net worth, 𝜇𝑡+1,
with respect to the fundamental shock, translates into a countercyclical
asset risk premium and volatility. Panel B of Fig. 2 plots the volatility of
the intermediary stochastic discount factor (SDF). Because consumption
volatility is assumed to be constant, the increase in SDF volatility in
the low net worth region is fully attributed to the financial accelerator
component 𝛷𝑡+1. The countercyclical market price further leads to a
countercyclical risk premium. Panel C of Fig. 2 plots the expected
returns as functions of net worth share. Indeed, the expected returns
of risky assets (i.e., dividend claims and consumption claims) are
high (low) in recessions (booms) when bank net worth is low (high).
Additionally, the nonlinear sensitivity also helps endogenously generate
a countercyclical return volatility. Panel D of Fig. 2 plots the volatility
of returns as functions of net worth share. As the economy moves to
the low net worth region, a small change in net worth share leads to a
large change in risk prices, which in turn leads to significant changes
in discount rates and asset prices.

Besides the stylized patterns on market return, our model is a
potential candidate to explain the stylized fact that (1) the equity term
premium is countercyclical, and (2) the term structure slope of the
equity yield is procyclical. In addition, the yield slope is upward-sloping
in expansions and downward-sloping in recessions.

First, the countercyclical equity term premium in our model is a
result of persistent and countercyclical risk prices. In our model, funda-
mental shocks simultaneously affect dividend growth and intermediary
net worth, which gives rise to the risk premium. The fundamental
shocks also affect risk prices. A negative fundamental shock will worsen
the banks’ balance sheets, which in turn will increase the price of risk.
Since shocks to risk prices are persistent, they have a more significant
effect on the price of long-maturity dividend strips. This results in a
positive equity term premium. As we discussed earlier, the financial
accelerator effect generates a countercyclical risk price; therefore, the
equity term premium is also countercyclical.

Second, the key element that generates a procyclical equity yield
slope is the strong mean reversion of the risk price. From Eq. (8),
the term structure slope of the equity yield can be decomposed into
an equity term premium component and an expected change in yields
component.4 The first component is countercyclical; to have a procycli-
cal yield slope, the expected changes must be procyclical and strong
enough. Panel A of Fig. 3 plots the one-period equity yield as a function
of the state variable ̂𝑛. The one-period equity yield decreases with
the net worth share because risk prices are high in bad times and
low in good times. If the economy is in a recession, as shown in the
left point of the figure, net worth is expected to recover and move
back to the steady state. Therefore, we have 𝑒𝑛,𝑡 > 𝐸𝑡(𝑒𝑛,𝑡+1), which
implies that the expected change component is negative. On the other
hand, if the economy is in an expansion, as shown on the right-hand
side of the figure, net worth is expected to gradually decrease to the
steady state. Following the same logic, this implies that the expected
change component is positive. The magnitude of the expected change
is determined by the mean-reverting speed. When the risk price has fast
mean-reverting speed, this makes the expected short-term yield quickly
revert to the long-run mean, thereby making the expected change
component relatively large. Panel B of Fig. 3 shows the conditional term
structure slope of equity yields generated by our model. The difference
between the 5-year and 1-year equity yield is an increasing function of
net worth share. The model-implied equity yield slope is procyclical,
exhibiting a negative slope in the low net worth region and a positive
slope in the high net worth region.

The sign-switching feature of the equity yield slope is a stronger
version of the procyclical pattern, wherein a procyclical equity yield
slope can be uniformly positive or negative. This feature indicates that
during recessions, the magnitude of expected changes should outweigh
that of the term premium. During expansions, the yield slope is unam-
biguously positive because both the expected change component and
the equity term premium component contribute to a positive slope.
However, during recessions, the expected change component implies a
negative slope, whereas the equity term premium component suggests
a positive slope. For the overall equity yield slope to be downward
sloping during such periods, the magnitude of the expected changes
should be significantly large to counterbalance the term premium.

Lastly, we decompose the equity yield slope in our model and
discuss the underlying intuition of how our model facilitates a fast
mean reversion of the risk price. Panel B of Fig. 3 plots the equity
yield slope and its two components as functions of bank net worth

4 In our model setup, because dividend growth is i.i.d. and the term
structure of risk-free interest rates is flat, the term structure slopes of equity
yields, forward equity yields, and hold-to-maturity returns have the same sign
and property. They all reflect information about the discount rate. Therefore,
for simplicity, we focus on the equity yield for the following discussion.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038568K. Li and C. Xu

Fig. 2. Asset Prices in Intermediary Model.
This figure illustrates the asset prices and properties of the intermediary stochastic discount factor (SDF) as functions of the state variable: bank net worth share ̂𝑛. Panel A shows
the marginal value of bank net worth, Panel B shows the volatility of the intermediary SDF, Panel C shows the conditional expected returns of risky assets, and Panel D shows
the conditional volatility of risky assets. The term ̂𝑛𝑠𝑠 denotes the steady-state net worth share in this economy, suggested by a long simulation from the model, ̂𝑛𝑏 denotes the
binding threshold, and ̂𝑛 ≤ ̂𝑛𝑏 is the region in which the constraint is binding. The parameters are based on the benchmark calibration summarized in Table 5.

share ̂𝑛. We note that the equity term premium is always positive and
decreases from the low net worth state to the high net worth state.
However, in the low net worth region, the expected negative change in
the risk premium dominates the equity term premium effect and makes
the overall term structure of the equity yield downward-sloping. The
strong mean-reverting effect comes from the endogenous fast recovery
of bank balance sheets in recessions. We can understand this point from
the evolution of aggregate bank net worth:

𝑁𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑁𝑡

[ 𝑄𝑡
𝑁𝑡

𝑅𝑏,𝑡+1 −

( 𝑄𝑡
𝑁𝑡

)

]

− 1

𝑅𝑡+1

+ 𝛿𝑄𝑡+1.

When the bank net worth is low, two effects are in play: first, the
expected return on assets 𝑅𝑏,𝑡+1 is endogenously high; second, because
the banking sector holds all the risky assets, the aggregate leverage
𝑄𝑡
is high. Both effects lead to a fast recovery of the balance sheet.
𝑁𝑡
In Internet Appendix D, we provide a reduced-form illustration of the
relationship between the mean-reversion speed of discount rates and
the dynamics of equity yield slopes.

3.3.3. The convenience yield

Our model is also capable of explaining the empirical observations
associated with the convenience yield, as presented in Van Binsber-
gen et al. (2021). In this section, we introduce the model-implied
convenience yield and map it into its empirical counterpart.

As a distinct prediction from our model, assets with different col-
lateralizability are priced differently, even if they have the exact same
cash flow in each state. We incorporate two additional assets into our
model: interbank loans and government bonds. Interbank loans and
government bonds have identical payoffs, both paying off one dollar for
sure upon maturity. However, we assume that the collateralizability of
government bonds is higher than that of interbank loans and that the
collateralizability of interbank loans is higher than equities (i.e., 𝜃𝑔 <

𝜃𝐹 𝐼 < 𝜃). The bank’s participation constraint with interbank loans and
government bonds becomes

𝑉𝑡

≥ 𝜃𝑠𝑏

𝑡 𝑄𝑡 + 𝜃𝐹 𝐼 𝑠𝐹 𝐼

𝑡 𝐵𝐹 𝐼

𝑡 + 𝜃𝑔𝑠𝑔

𝑡 𝐵𝑔
𝑡 ,

(28)

and 𝑠𝑔

𝑡

𝑡

and 𝐵𝑔

in which 𝑠𝐹 𝐼
𝑡 are the holding shares of interbank loans and
government bonds, and 𝐵𝐹 𝐼
𝑡 are the prices of one-period in-
terbank loans and government bonds. We assume that the net supplies
of interbank loans and government bonds are zero, so the inclusion of
these additional assets does not affect the original equilibrium. The risk-
free rate with full collateralizability 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡, government bond rate 𝑅𝑔,𝑡,
and the interbank rate 𝑅𝐹 𝐼,𝑡 should satisfy

𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 =

) ,

1
𝐸 (𝑀𝑡+1
𝛾𝑡𝜃𝑔

𝑅𝑔,𝑡 = 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 +

𝑅𝐹 𝐼,𝑡 = 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 +

Therefore,

𝑅𝐹 𝐼,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑔,𝑡 =

𝑅𝑔,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 =

𝐸 [𝑀𝑡+1

{𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1

}] ,

𝛾𝑡𝜃𝐹 𝐼

{𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1

}] .

𝐸 [𝑀𝑡+1

(𝜃𝐹 𝐼 − 𝜃𝑔)
𝛾𝑡
{𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1
𝐸 [𝑀𝑡+1

}] ,

𝛾𝑡𝜃𝑔

{𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1

}] .

𝐸 [𝑀𝑡+1

(29)

(30)

In this context, 𝛾𝑡 is the Lagrange multiplier for the leverage constraint,
which is greater than zero when the constraint is binding and equals
zero otherwise.

The convenience yield is defined as the yield differential between
non-collateralizable and collateralizable risk-free assets, such as gov-
ernment bonds. The spread between the two assets reflects their liq-
uidity or collateral value. In our model, we interpret the difference

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038569K. Li and C. Xu

Fig. 3. Equity Yields in Intermediary Model.
Panel A shows the one-period equity yield as a function of state variable: bank net worth share, ̂𝑛. The arrows show the direction in which the state variable is expected to move.
Panel B shows the decomposition of the term structure slope of equity yields from Eq. (7). The term slope is decomposed into the equity term premium and expected changes in
yields, plotted as functions of ̂𝑛. The term ̂𝑛𝑠𝑠 denotes the steady-state net worth share in this economy, suggested by a long simulation from the model, ̂𝑛𝑏 denotes the binding
threshold, and ̂𝑛 ≤ ̂𝑛𝑏 is the region in which the constraint is binding. The parameters are based on the benchmark calibration summarized in Table 5.

between the interbank rate and the government bond rate, 𝑅𝐹 𝐼,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑔,𝑡,
as the model counterpart of the convenience yield. Empirically, it is
measured as the difference between the box rate and the government
bond rate. Van Binsbergen et al. (2021) calculate an interest rate
without collateral value, referred to as the box rate, using an option
strategy.5 Let 𝑦𝑏𝑜𝑥
𝑛,𝑡 denote the
maturity-𝑛 government bond yield. The maturity-𝑛 convenience yield,
denoted by 𝑦𝑐𝑦

𝑛,𝑡 denote the maturity-𝑛 box rate and 𝑦𝑔𝑜𝑣

𝑛,𝑡, can be calculated as follows:

Van Binsbergen et al. (2021) provide three key empirical obser-
vations about the convenience yield: (1) it behaves countercyclically,
spiking notably during economic recessions; (2) it effectively predicts
bond excess returns; and (3) its slope remains constant across business
cycles. Our model offers explanations for these observed phenomena.
Section 5.5 elaborates on these explanations and also evaluates the
model’s quantitative ability to capture these key empirical findings.

𝑦𝑐𝑦
𝑛,𝑡 = 𝑦𝑏𝑜𝑥

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑦𝑔𝑜𝑣
𝑛,𝑡 .

(31)

4. Measuring the tightness of intermediary constraints

5 Specifically, they estimate the box rate from the put–call parity:
)
−𝑦𝑏𝑜𝑥
𝑛,𝑡 𝑛

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑆𝑡

+ exp

𝑝𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑐𝑛,𝑡 =

(

𝐾,

(

)

in which 𝑝𝑛,𝑡 and 𝑐𝑛,𝑡 are put and call with time to maturity 𝑛 and strike price
𝐾. The term 𝑆𝑡 is the current value of the underlying and 
𝑛,𝑡 denotes the
present value of the cash flow that the security delivers. The corresponding
non-collateralizable risk-free rate, 𝑦𝑏𝑜𝑥

𝑛,𝑡 , can be locked in by a box strategy.

In previous sections, we emphasized that our intermediary model’s
ability to explain equity yield slope dynamics relies significantly on the
nonlinear feature of risk price within the binding region. This raises a
question: in the data, to what extent do fluctuations in the equity yield
slope stem from the tightness of intermediary constraints? To address
this, we use a model-guided approach to construct a relative tightness
index (RT index), which empirically measures the marginal value of
intermediary net worth. This index allows us to explore the connection

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385610K. Li and C. Xu

between the tightness of intermediary constraints and asset prices in the
data. Additionally, it informs and guides our calibration for the model’s
quantitative analysis.

4.1. Relative tightness index

The intermediary asset pricing literature often faces the challenge
that the degree of financial constraint tightness is not directly observ-
able. In this work, we address this issue by adopting the asset pricing
conditions specified by our model and developing a novel empirical ap-
proach to estimate the degree of constraint tightness. By employing this
method, we seek to establish the empirical and quantitative plausibility
of the intermediary channel in accounting for the equity term structure.
We rely on the key pricing Eq. (24) from our theoretical model
to identify the marginal value of net worth. We assume that the
collateralizability parameter 𝜃 is asset-class-specific. The return of asset
𝑖 in asset class 𝑗, denoted as 𝑅𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1, should satisfy

[

𝐸𝑡

𝑀𝑡+1

𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

]

𝑅𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1

= 1 − 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛾𝑡

𝜃𝑗
𝜇𝑡

.

(32)

)

𝑘𝑓 ℎ

𝑘=1 𝑏ℎ

(𝑀𝑡+1

𝑘,𝑡+1, in which 𝑓 ℎ

To facilitate empirical implementation, we make a reduced-form
assumption that the household stochastic discount factor can be repre-
sented as a log-linear form of 𝑚 household pricing factors: log
=
𝑎ℎ +∑𝑚
𝑘,𝑡+1 represents a household pricing factor.
Similarly, we assume that the logarithm of the marginal value of net
worth takes a linear form with 𝑛 intermediary state variables: log(𝜇𝑡) =
𝑎𝑓 + ∑𝑛
𝑙=1 𝑏𝑓
𝑙 log(𝑧𝑙,𝑡), where 𝑧𝑙,𝑡 represents a financial intermediary state
variable. Let 𝑓 𝑓
𝑙,𝑡+1 = log(𝑧𝑙,𝑡+1) − log(𝑧𝑙,𝑡) be a financial intermediary
pricing factor; we then have log
𝑙,𝑡+1. To capture
the fluctuations in the marginal value of intermediary net worth, we
construct an index 𝜅1
𝑙 log(𝑧𝑙,𝑡), in which 𝜅1 is a constant that
will be defined later. As the level parameter 𝑎𝑓 cannot be identified,
we refer to this index as the ‘‘relative tightness index’’ (RT index).

( 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

= ∑𝑛

𝑙=1 𝑏𝑓

𝑙=1 𝑏𝑓

𝑙 𝑓 𝑓

∑𝑛

)

Next, we offer an empirical procedure analogous to the factor
pricing framework to estimate the related parameters in order to cal-
culate the RT index. Proposition 3 summarizes the key equations to be
estimated.

Proposition 3. The linearized pricing equation can be written as

(𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡

)

+

𝐸𝑡

𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1) =

1
2

𝛼𝑗,𝑡 −

𝑚
∑

𝑘=1

𝑏ℎ
𝑘𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑓 ℎ

𝑘,𝑡+1, 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1) − 𝜅1

𝑛
∑

𝑙=1

𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑓 𝑓
𝑏𝑓

𝑙,𝑡+1

, 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1).

Conditioning down, we obtain the following beta representation:

𝐸 (𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡

)

+

1
2

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1) = 𝛼𝑗 +

𝑚
∑

𝑘=1

𝑖,𝑗,𝑘𝜆ℎ
𝛽ℎ

𝑘 +

𝑛
∑

𝑙=1

𝑖,𝑗,𝑙𝜆𝑓
𝛽𝑓
𝑙 .

(33)

(34)

In this equation, 𝛽 is the standard notion in a multi-regression setting, and
𝜆ℎ and 𝜆𝑓 are the prices of risks on factor shocks.

The coefficients of pricing factors in the stochastic discount factor can

be calculated using the formula

[

𝐛ℎ
𝜅1𝐛𝑓

]

= −

[ 𝜎𝐟 ℎ,𝐟 ℎ
𝜎𝐟 𝑓 ,𝐟 ℎ

𝜎𝐟 ℎ,𝐟 𝑓
𝜎𝐟 𝑓 ,𝐟 𝑓

]−1

[ 𝝀ℎ
𝝀𝑓

⋅

]

.

(35)

in which 𝜅1 = (1−𝜆) exp(log(𝜇))
, 𝝀ℎ and 𝝀𝑓 are vectors of risk prices, 𝐛ℎ and
𝜆+(1−𝜆) exp(log(𝜇))
𝐛𝑓 are vectors of coefficients on pricing factors in the stochastic discount
factor, and 𝜎𝐟 ,𝐟 is the variance covariance matrix of factors.

Proof. See Appendix A. □

The existing literature on the measurement of intermediary SDFs
can be broadly classified into two categories. The first group, including
studies such as Adrian et al. (2014), He et al. (2017), and Haddad and
Muir (2021), uses intermediary state variables, such as the leverage

ratio and net worth, to measure this. On the other hand, studies such
as Hu et al. (2013) and Du et al. (2023) posit that certain mispricings
arise from intermediary constraints and thus adopt certain arbitrage
spreads as proxies.

Our approach falls into the first category. Similar to Haddad and
Muir (2021), our strategy combines multiple intermediary state vari-
ables to measure constraint tightness. Distinctively, our approach uti-
lizes the Euler equation from our model, allowing asset returns to
determine the weight of each variable. By integrating several interme-
diary state variables, our approach mitigates potential measurement
errors associated with using a single state variable. Additionally, it
avoids the risk of mistakenly measuring changes in market friction
for certain markets instead of accurately evaluating the tightness of
intermediary constraints — a challenge that arises when relying on
arbitrage spreads from particular markets.

The assumption that the logarithm of the marginal value of net
worth takes a linear form of intermediary state variables arises from
empirical considerations. In theory, a single intermediary state vari-
able, for instance, intermediary net worth, should be enough to track
variations in constraint tightness. However, empirically, these variables
are subject to measurement errors. Using a linear combination of these
variables might alleviate these errors while preserving interpretability.6
To estimate the RT index, we first employ the Fama–MacBeth two-
step approach to estimate Eq. (34). After obtaining the risk price
estimates, 𝝀, we use Eq. (35) to back out the related coefficients in the
RT index. We use cross-sectional asset returns from He et al. (2017) to
estimate the risk prices in Eq. (34). The dataset includes 124 portfolios
across 7 different asset classes and covers the period from 1970Q1 to
2012Q4. For a more comprehensive description of the time series, read-
ers can refer to He et al. (2017). We use the intermediary capital ratio
from He et al. (2017) (HKM capital ratio), the broker–dealer leverage
ratio from Adrian et al. (2014) (AEM leverage ratio), and distance to
insolvency proposed by Atkeson et al. (2017)7 (DI) as intermediary
state variables. Since households have Epstein–Zin preferences, we
include consumption growth and the market factor (as a proxy for the
return on wealth) to account for variations in the household’s stochastic
discount factor. We employ the Fama–MacBeth two-step regression to
estimate the model. We assume a uniform factor risk premium across
different assets, while allowing for asset-class-specific 𝛼𝑗 .

The estimation results for the model are presented in Table 2. The
model fits the data well, with an R-squared value of 76% and a mean
absolute pricing error of 0.83%. Consistent with the prior literature,
all three risk prices are positive. Specifically, the estimated price of the
capital ratio factor and distance to insolvency factor are 11.22% and
15.11% per quarter, respectively, and both are highly significant. To
ensure robustness, we provide results from alternative factor specifica-
tions for the household’s stochastic discount factor in columns (1)-(3).
These alternative specifications produce estimates closely aligned with
the benchmark case.

Utilizing the estimated coefficients and time series of intermediary
state variables, we construct the RT index at a quarterly frequency from
1970 to 2020,8 but it is also possible to create a monthly frequency RT
index by utilizing monthly frequency state variables. In this case, given
that broker–dealer leverage data are available only on a quarterly basis,
we interpolate the data to obtain information at a monthly frequency.

6 However, a potential drawback of this method is that this particular
linear form might not fully capture constraint tightness fluctuations if the true
relationship is highly non-linear or if the coefficient changes over time.

7 Atkeson et al. (2017) propose using the inverse of equity volatility 1∕𝜎2
𝐸 as
a measure of a firm’s distance to insolvency. We apply this measure to publicly
listed financial firms and use the value-weighted average of an individual
firm’s distance to insolvency as a proxy for the distance to insolvency of the
financial intermediary sector.

8 Because the dataset from He et al. (2017) ends at 2012, we estimate the
coefficients using a shorter sample (1970–2012) but use a longer time series
of intermediary state variables to construct the RT index.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385611K. Li and C. Xu

Table 2
Risk prices of intermediary factors.

𝛥 HKM capital ratio

𝛥 AEM BD leverage

𝛥 distance to insolvency

Factors in household SDF
Class-specific fixed effects

𝑅2
MAPE
obs
𝜒 stat

Benchmark

0.1122
(0.0332)
0.0004
(0.0190)
0.1511
(0.0563)
𝛥𝑐 and mkt
Yes

0.7640
0.0083
172
118.73

(1)

0.0630
(0.0287)
0.0109
(0.0195)
0.1930
(0.0652)
𝛥𝑐
Yes

0.7836
0.0081
172
119.21

(2)

0.0800
(0.0328)
0.0158
(0.0159)
0.1307
(0.0622)
𝛥𝑐 and FF-3
Yes

0.7750
0.0074
172
110.44

(3)

0.0812
(0.0312)
0.0127
(0.0160)
0.1296
(0.0611)
𝛥𝑐 and FF-5
Yes

0.7630
0.0076
172
121.02

This table shows estimates for the pricing of risks associated with shocks to three factors: the HKM intermediary capital ratio, the AEM
broker–dealer leverage ratio, and the distance to insolvency of financial intermediaries. The model includes an asset-class-specific intercept and
takes into account consumption growth and Fama–French five factors as household risk factors. Risk prices are calculated as the mean slopes of
period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series
regression. The data used for the analysis cover the period from 1970Q1 to 2012Q4 on a quarterly basis. The mean absolute pricing error
(MAPE) is reported, and we provide GMM standard errors adjusted for cross-asset correlation in the residuals and for the estimation error of
the time-series betas.

Table 3
Equity yield slope regression: A horse race.

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2
𝑅2

𝑜𝑜𝑠

RT index

−0.0451
(0.015)
50
0.53

RT index

−0.0276
(0.007)
185
0.18
0.11

RT (1)

−0.0389
(0.010)
50
0.57

RT (1)

−0.0286
(0.010)
185
0.19
0.16

Panel A: Equity yield slope regression

RT (2)

−0.0434
(0.014)
50
0.53

RT (3)

−0.0407
(0.012)
50
0.56

HKM

0.1584
(0.067)
50
0.44

Panel B: Equity Yield Slope (GKK) Regression

RT (2)

−0.0303
(0.009)
185
0.22
0.18

RT (3)

−0.0308
(0.008)
185
0.23
0.20

HKM

0.0664
(0.017)
185
0.13
−0.12

AEM

0.0054
(0.038)
50
0.00

AEM

0.0386
(0.019)
185
0.07
0.02

DI

0.1142
(0.030)
50
0.57

DI

0.0639
(0.033)
185
0.10
0.04

DP ratio

−0.4107
(0.058)
50
0.68

DP ratio

−0.0298
(0.017)
185
0.04
−6.01

This table presents univariate regression results for the equity yield slope on different predictors:

5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

We choose the RT index, the intermediary capital ratio from He et al. (2017) (column ‘‘HKM‘‘), the broker–dealer leverage ratio from Adrian et al. (2014) (column ‘‘AEM’’), the
distance to insolvency (column ‘‘DI’’) proposed by Atkeson et al. (2017), and the dividend-price ratio of the stock index as 𝑥 variables. The equity yield slope in Panel A is based
on S&P 500 index dividend futures contracts, covering the period from 2004Q4 to 2017Q1. The equity yield slope in Panel B is the estimated slope from Giglio et al. (2023),
covering the period from 1974Q3 to 2020Q3. All the results are based on quarterly regressions, and standard errors are Newey–West corrected with 12 lags. The out-of-sample
𝑅2 (𝑅2

𝑜𝑜𝑠) is computed using dividend strip data (2004Q4-2017Q1) as the training sample.

4.2. RT index and equity yield slope

In this subsection, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the RT index
in capturing the dynamics of the equity yield slope, despite it being
estimated from the returns of other asset classes. In particular, we
illustrate that, observationally, the RT index tracks the equity yield
slope very well. Furthermore, we conduct a regression analysis to show
that the RT index outperforms existing intermediary state variables in
the literature both in-sample and out-of-sample.

Fig. 1 illustrates the time-series properties of the RT index and its
relationship with the equity yield slope. The RT index is notably coun-
tercyclical, spiking during recessions when financial intermediaries face
constraints. The fitted equity yield slope, which uses the RT index as
a single predictor, aligns well with both the realized equity yield slope
and the estimated equity yield slope from Giglio et al. (2023) (GKK
yield slope).

To compare the explanatory power of the RT index for equity slopes
with other variables, we run a horse race of the equity yield slope
regression on different predictors:
𝑒𝑓
5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
The 𝑥 variable includes the RT index, the intermediary capital ratio
from He et al. (2017), the broker–dealer leverage ratio from Adrian
et al. (2014), the distance to insolvency proposed by Atkeson et al.

1,𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡.

(2017), and the dividend-price (dp) ratio of the stock index. Table 3
presents the results. Panel A displays the regression based on the
realized yield slope from S&P 500 index dividend futures contracts,
covering the period from 2004Q4 to 2017Q1. Panel B presents the
regression based on the estimated yield slope from Giglio et al. (2023),
spanning 1974Q3 to 2020Q3.

In Panel A’s shorter sample, the RT index’s 𝑅2 ranks third, achieving
a comparable 𝑅2 with the distance to insolvency and the dp ratio
of the index. In Panel B’s longer sample, the RT index ranks first in
explaining equity yield slope fluctuations, while the HKM capital ratio
ranks second with an 𝑅2 only two-thirds that of the RT index.

We also compute the out-of-sample 𝑅2 using dividend futures data
as a training sample. Specifically, we first run regressions with dividend
futures data from 2004Q4 to 2017Q1 to obtain estimates ̂𝛼0 and ̂𝛼1. We
then use the estimated coefficients and predictors to compute the fitted
equity yield slope. We calculate the mean squared error 𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑚 with
the fitted slope and GKK yield slope and use the mean of the GKK yield
slope to compute 𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑏𝑚𝑘. Finally, the out-of-sample 𝑅2 is computed
𝑜𝑜𝑠 = 1 − 𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑚∕𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑏𝑚𝑘. The last row of Panel B reports 𝑅2
as 𝑅2
𝑜𝑜𝑠.
Remarkably, the 𝑅2
𝑜𝑜𝑠 of the RT index remains stable compared to the
in-sample 𝑅2, decreasing only from 18% to 11%. In contrast, the 𝑅2
𝑜𝑜𝑠
of other predictors drops significantly, with some predictors generating
negative 𝑅2

𝑜𝑜𝑠.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385612K. Li and C. Xu

Additionally, in columns RT (1)-(3), we report the regression out-
comes for RT indices created using other factor specifications in the
household’s SDF. The findings show that these alternative indices pro-
duce coefficients and R-squared values that are comparable to the
benchmark index.

In summary, the RT index exhibits superior explanatory power
for equity yield slope dynamics compared to other intermediary state
variables. It also outperforms the dividend-to-price ratio of the stock
index, a natural candidate for explaining term structure dynamics.
Importantly, when estimating the RT index, we did not rely on informa-
tion from equity yields, making its superior performance out-of-sample.
This strong connection between our RT index and the equity term
structure supports the idea that financial intermediation is a compelling
channel for explaining term structure dynamics.

The estimated RT index also provides useful information about the
)
growth rate of the marginal value of intermediary net worth: log
.
Since the intermediary stochastic discount factor critically depends on
this term, the volatility of marginal value growth imposes a strong
discipline on our model calibration.

( 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

4.3. Portfolios sorted by RT index exposures

In this subsection, we provide evidence on the relationship between
exposure to the RT index and the cross-section of stock returns. We first
show that RT exposure negatively predicts the cross-sectional expected
stock returns, consistent with the model. Then we conduct an asset
pricing test on RT exposure sorted portfolios. Our findings indicate that
innovation to the RT index is a negatively priced source of aggregate
risk, which lends strong support to our model. Furthermore, a two-
factor model with market excess returns and RT index shocks can
explain returns of the RT exposure sorted portfolio well.

To understand the connection between RT exposure and future stock
returns in the cross-section, we construct five portfolios sorted on firms’
RT exposures estimated from a rolling window regression, using 60
months of data prior to the portfolio formation date. Portfolios are
rebalanced at a monthly frequency starting from April 1975 and ending
in December 2020. We report both average equal- and value-weighted
portfolio returns across all firms.

Panel A of Table 4 reports the average excess stock returns, Sharpe
ratios, and CAPM alphas of the five RT exposure sorted portfolios.
Consistent with the model, across the two sets of average returns,
firms with low RT exposure earn, on average, subsequently higher
returns than firms with high RT exposure. The difference in returns
is economically large and statistically significant. The average value-
weighted return spread is 6.24% annually, with a t-stat of 2.86. The
average equal-weighted return spread is 3.18% annually, with a t-stat
of 2.33. From the fact that the RT exposure return spread is smaller
in equal-weighted returns than in value-weighted returns, we can infer
that the return spread is stronger among large firms.

The CAPM cannot explain the pattern of average returns of these
portfolios. The alpha of the return spread is large and significant,
between 6.99% per annum for value-weighted returns and 3.94% for
equal-weighted returns. This result follows from the fact that the mar-
ket betas of the portfolios go in the wrong direction across the RT
exposure sorted portfolios. Specifically, the portfolio of firms with low
RT exposure has a lower market beta than the portfolio of firms with
high RT exposure, which is inconsistent with the higher average returns
and risks of the low RT exposure portfolio.

Panel B reports the asset pricing tests on the RT exposure sorted
portfolios. The first row reports results from CAPM. The results show
that CAPM does a poor job in explaining the cross-section of RT
exposure sorted portfolios. The risk price of market beta is negative
and insignificant. The r-squared is only 0.3%, the mean absolute pricing
error is as large as 0.17% per month, and the 𝜒 2 test rejects the null
hypothesis that the pricing errors are all zero. In contrast, the second
row reports results from the two-factor model of market excess returns

and RT index shocks, as proposed by the intermediary model. It is
evident from the data that including the RT index shock is impor-
tant. It raises the r-squared to 89.8% and reduces the mean absolute
pricing error to 0.06% per month. The 𝜒 2 test fails to reject the null
hypothesis that the pricing errors are all zero, with a 𝑝-value of 0.46.
The corresponding risk price for RT index exposure is −14.75%, which
is both economically large and statistically significant. Interestingly,
when controlling for RT index exposure, the price of market risk turns
positive, although still insignificant.

Taken together, variations in RT exposures result in a significant
return spread across the cross-section of stocks. Moreover, in line with
the Euler equation in our intermediary model, a two-factor model
combining market excess returns and RT index shocks effectively prices
the portfolios sorted by RT exposure.

5. Quantitative analysis of the model

In this section, we use the RT index to guide our calibration of the
intermediary stochastic discount factor and assess the model’s ability
to replicate key moments of equity yields and convenience yields, both
unconditionally and conditionally. We present our model calibration
and discuss the model parameters in Section 5.1. In Sections 5.2 and
5.3, we demonstrate the model’s performance in reproducing the un-
conditional and conditional moments of equity yields and convenience
yields. Sections 5.4 and 5.5 further investigate the model’s capacity to
explain the dynamics of equity yields and convenience yields.

5.1. Calibration parameters

In this subsection, we discuss the parameter values in our bench-
mark calibration, summarized in Table 5. We focus on a long sample
of U.S. data (1930–2020). Internet Appendix F provides more details
on our data sources.

Following the literature, we set the relative rate of risk aversion, 𝛾,
to be 10 and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, 𝜓, to be 1.5.
We set the discount factor, 𝛽, to be 0.9985 to match the level of the
risk-free interest rate in the data.

For the log output growth process, we calibrate the parameters 𝜇𝑦
and 𝜎 to broadly match the mean and volatility of consumption growth
in the data. Similarly, 𝜇𝑑 is set to match the average log dividend
growth rate. We calibrate the additional parameters in the log dividend
growth process, 𝜑 and 𝜑𝑑 , to match the overall volatility of dividend
growth and its correlation with consumption.

The financial sector parameters include the liquidation probability
of banks, 𝜆; the transfer parameter for new banks, 𝛿; and the fraction of
divertible bank assets, 𝜃. As there are no direct empirical counterparts
in the data to determine these parameters, we choose them indirectly
to broadly match three targets: an average intermediary capital ratio,
𝐸
, of 0.65
for the economy-wide financial intermediary sector; and a relative
volatility of marginal value growth in recessions,

, of 0.21; an average book-to-market ratio, 𝐸

, of 1.67.

( 𝑁𝑡
𝑄𝑡

( 1
𝜇𝑡

)

)

𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑐 (𝛥 log(𝜇))
𝜎(𝛥 log(𝜇))

Following Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), our model treats the entire
intermediary sector as a group of identical institutions. In the model,
the capital structure of the intermediary plays a central role in deter-
mining asset prices. It is important to match the capital ratio because
it affects how consumption shocks get magnified and the probability
of being in the constrained versus unconstrained region. We follow
the composition of the financial intermediary sector defined in Adrian
et al. (2010) to compute the capital ratio of the aggregate financial
intermediary from the flow of funds table.9 The average capital ratio
over the sample period 1945–2020 is 0.21. The average value of net
worth is another important moment that regulates our calibration of

9 Publicly available in the data library of the Federal Reserve Board, http:

//www.federalreserve.gov.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385613K. Li and C. Xu

Table 4
Portfolios sorted by RT index exposures.

Panel A: Returns of RT beta sorted portfolios

L

2

3

4

H

Value-weighted Portfolios

𝐸(𝑅𝑒)
[𝑡]
SR
𝛼𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝑀
[𝑡]

11.84
(4.52)
0.62
2.33
(1.71)

Equal-weighted Portfolios

𝐸(𝑅𝑒)
[𝑡]
SR
𝛼𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝑀
[𝑡]

CAPM

𝑅𝑀 + 𝛥𝑅𝑇

13.99
(4.15)
0.64
4.26
(1.86)

Const.
0.99
(2.85)
0.66
(1.52)

10.45
(4.99)
0.67
2.51
(2.34)

13.23
(4.93)
0.74
4.81
(2.54)

𝑅𝑀
−0.09
-(0.22)
0.06
(0.13)

9.49
(4.40)
0.66
2.00
(3.13)

12.57
(5.05)
0.75
4.49
(2.63)

7.05
(3.10)
0.46
−0.97
-(1.68)

12.12
(4.69)
0.68
3.47
(2.19)

Panel B: Asset Pricing Tests

𝛥𝑅𝑇

−14.75
-(2.59)

𝑅2
0.003

0.898

5.60
(1.80)
0.27
−4.66
-(3.24)

10.81
(3.08)
0.46
0.33
(0.15)

MAPE
0.17

0.06

LMH

6.24
(2.86)
0.46
6.99
(2.71)

3.18
(2.33)
0.35
3.94
(2.53)

𝜒 2
23.77 (p=0.00)

8.80 (p=0.46)

This table reports average annualized excess returns (𝐸(𝑅𝑒)), CAPM alphas (𝛼𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝑀 ), Newey–West adjusted 𝑡-statistics ([𝑡]), Sharpe Ratios (SR),
and test results of both the CAPM and two-factor model across five value-weighted and equal-weighted RT beta sorted portfolios. Portfolios are
rebalanced at a monthly frequency starting from April 1975 and ending in December 2020. RT betas are computed using 5 years of monthly
data prior to the portfolio formation date. Column ‘L’ reports the portfolio consisting of firms with the lowest RT index exposures and Column
‘H’ reports the portfolio consisting of firms with the highest RT index exposures. Column ‘LMH’ reports the return difference of Portfolio ‘L’ and
Portfolio ‘H’. In the asset pricing tests, risk prices, expressed in percentages (monthly), are calculated as the mean slopes of period-by-period
cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression. The
mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is reported, and we provide GMM standard errors adjusted for cross-asset correlation in the residuals and
for the estimation error of the time-series betas. The cross-sectional 𝜒 2 statistic tests whether pricing errors in the cross-sectional regression are
all zero, with p-values reported in parentheses.

the financial constraint. We compute the book-to-market ratio of the
financial industry from CRSP/Compustat. The average book-to-market
ratio over the sample period 1950–2020 is 0.65. The growth rate of a
bank’s marginal net worth value plays a direct role in the augmented
stochastic discount factor. Its relative volatility during recessions is
instrumental in gauging the non-linearity of asset pricing effects stem-
ming from financial constraints. We base our moment calculation on
the estimated RT index. By defining periods where the RT index is in
the top 15% as recessions, we measure the volatility of marginal value
growth in these recessions relative to its unconditional volatility. For
the sample period from 1970 to 2020, this moment value stands at 1.67.
From Eq. (30), it is evident that collateralizability parameters, 𝜃𝐹 𝐼
and 𝜃𝑔, are important in determining the magnitude of convenience
yield and government bond premium. We set the collateralizability
parameter for government bonds, 𝜃𝑔, at 0.1 to target an average 2-year
government bond excess return of 0.6% and the collateralizability pa-
rameter for interbank loans, 𝜃𝐹 𝐼 , at 0.14 to match a convenience yield
volatility of 0.18%. These data moments are derived from the sample
period spanning 2004 to 2020. We opt to match the convenience yield
volatility rather than the convenience yield level, as the convenience
yield in the non-binding region is zero in our model, whereas it remains
positive in the data. This discrepancy may be attributed to other
frictions not accounted for in our model.

5.2. Aggregate moments

We compute the model-implied aggregate moments from a long
simulation of 10, 000 annual observations. Our results are summarized
in Table 6.

Designed by the calibration procedure, the model matches the ag-
gregate consumption and dividend dynamics very well. By choosing
two parameters, 𝜑 and 𝜑𝑑 (i.e., the loading of aggregate dividend
growth on the consumption growth shock and its own shock), the
model roughly matches the correlation between consumption and div-
idend growth and also matches the overall volatility of the dividend

Table 5
Parameter values in the benchmark calibration.

Summary of Calibration parameters

Preference parameters

Risk aversion
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
Discount factor

Consumption Dynamics

Mean of consumption growth
Volatility of consumption growth

Dividend Dynamics

Mean of dividend growth
Dividend loading on consumption growth shocks
Dividend loading on dividend specific shocks

Financial Intermediary parameters

Fraction of asset divertible
Fraction of wealth transferred to new banks
Exit probability of banks
𝜃 parameter of inter-bank loan
𝜃 of government bond

𝛾
𝜓
𝛽

𝜇𝑦
𝜎

𝜇𝑑
𝜑
𝜑𝑑

𝜃
𝛿
𝜆
𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑔

10
1.5
0.9985

0.5
1.25

0.35
3.5
4

0.4
0.01
0.08
0.14
0.1

This table reports the parameter values used for the benchmark calibration. Growth
rates and volatilities are at a quarterly frequency and reported in percentage terms.

process. We use three asset pricing moments – the capital ratio, book-
to-market ratio, and relative volatility of marginal value growth in
recessions – to calibrate the intermediary parameters. Additionally, we
use the government bond premium and convenience yield volatility
to calibrate the collateralizability parameters. As expected, the model
closely matches these moments.

The model also performs very well in matching other asset pricing
moments that are not targeted in the calibration. First, the model
produces a high equity premium 6.29% and a stock market volatility
of 16.37%, which is only slightly lower than a volatility of 19.12% in
the data. Second, the model is also able to generate an unconditionally
positive equity yield slope. The model-implied 5-year minus 1-year

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385614K. Li and C. Xu

Table 6
Aggregate moments in the benchmark calibration.

Panel A: Aggregate Quantities

Average consumption growth
Volatility of consumption growth

Average dividend growth
Volatility of dividend growth

Corr of consumption and investment

Intermediary capital ratio

Book-to-market ratio of financial intermediary
Relative volatility of log( 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

) in recessions

Panel B: Asset Prices

Equity premium

Volatility of equity return

Average log PD ratio

Volatility of log PD ratio

Mean of equity yield slope

Volatility of equity yield slope

Mean of convenience yields (12-month)

Volatility of convenience yields (12-month)

2-year bond premium

𝐸(𝛥𝑐)
𝜎(𝛥𝑐)

𝐸(𝛥𝑑)
𝜎(𝛥𝑑)

𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝛥𝑐, 𝛥𝑑)

𝐸(𝑁∕𝑄)

𝐸(1∕𝜇𝑡)
𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑐 (𝛥 log(𝜇))
𝜎(𝛥 log(𝜇))

𝐸(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )

𝜎(𝑟𝑚)

𝐸(𝑝 − 𝑑)

𝜎(𝑝 − 𝑑)
5 − 𝑒𝑓
𝐸(𝑒𝑓
1 )
5 − 𝑒𝑓
𝜎(𝑒𝑓
1 )
𝐸(𝑦𝑐𝑦
12𝑚)
𝜎(𝑦𝑐𝑦
12𝑚)
𝐸(𝑟𝑥𝑔𝑜𝑣
𝑡+1)

Data

1.90
2.25

1.39
12.54

0.47

0.21

0.65

1.67

6.09

19.12

3.41

0.47

0.37

6.69

0.35

0.18

0.60

Model

1.98
2.52

1.30
13.39

0.66

0.23

0.58

1.93

6.29

16.37

2.74

0.09

1.20

1.79

0.13

0.18

0.60

This table presents summary statistics for aggregate consumption growth, dividends, and asset prices. The data for
aggregate quantities are real values, sampled at an annual frequency, and cover the sample period from 1930 to
2020, whenever the data are available. Equity yields are from Giglio et al. (2023), covering the period from 1974Q3
to 2020Q3. Convenience yields and bond premium data cover the sample period of 2004–2020. The column labeled
‘Model’ presents corresponding moments based on a very long simulation (10,000 years of artificial data) from our
model.

equity yield spread is 1.2%, which is greater than the 0.37% spread
observed in the GKK sample, yet aligns with the 1.2% spread found in
the dividend future sample.

While our model presents a good match for several key aspects in
the data, it is important to acknowledge certain areas where further
improvements could be considered. For instance, the model understates
the volatility of the log price–dividend ratio and the equity yield slope
compared to the data, partly due to our assumption of an i.i.d. dividend
growth. On the one hand, this assumption allows us to solely focus on
the discount rate effect derived from the estimated intermediary con-
straint tightness. On the other hand, it may not fully capture variations
arising from expected dividend growth.

In summary, Table 6 suggests that the model performs reasonably
well in matching both cash flow dynamics and asset pricing moments
for U.S. data, given that the driving force is an i.i.d. process. Introduc-
ing a predictable component in expected consumption and dividend
growth could further enhance these aspects, an extension we will
discuss further in Sections 6.1 and 6.2.

5.3. Conditional moments

In this subsection, we examine the performance of our model in

replicating the observed conditional moments in the data.

Panel A of Table 7 displays the conditional moments of aggregate
quantities and asset prices in different phases of the business cycle.
In the data, we classify periods with an RT index in the top 15%
as recessions. Correspondingly, periods with a marginal value of net
worth in the top 15% in the model are classified as recessions. The
15% recession frequency is comparable to the 16% NBER recession
frequency from 1970 to 2020.

The conditional moments produced by our model are reasonably
close to their data counterparts. First, both our model and the empirical
data depict expansions as periods of high consumption growth and high
realized stock returns, whereas recessions are characterized by negative
consumption growth and negative stock returns.

Second, our model endogenously generates countercyclical volatil-
ity of asset returns and marginal value growth. Notably, our model
does not feature any time-varying cash flow dynamics. As a result, any
fluctuations in volatility arise purely from changes in discount rates.
This occurs because, in the low net worth region, the risk price is more
sensitive to fundamental shocks, leading to larger asset price changes
and higher return volatility. Importantly, the conditional volatility of
marginal value growth is also comparable between the model and data.
In both cases, the relative volatility surges during recessions, highlight-
ing the highly nonlinear nature of the marginal value of net worth in
the binding region and its heightened sensitivity to fundamental shocks
during recessions.

Third, our model also replicates salient features of equity yield
dynamics. The 1-year equity yield is highly countercyclical: it has a
conditional mean of 2.53% in expansions and 8.56% in recessions. The
equity yield slope is strongly procyclical and sign-switching, similar
to the data, with a 1.80% upward slope in expansions and a −2.29%
downward slope in recessions. However, the magnitude of the slope
difference between recessions and expansions is smaller in the model
than in the data. This discrepancy arises because our model features
i.i.d. normal shocks in consumption growth, and the slope dynamics are
solely driven by the discount rate channel. In contrast, the data indicate
that the economy exhibits predictable growth rates, leading to more
significant cyclical variations in the equity yield slope. In Section 6,
we incorporate predictable dividend growth into our baseline model,
demonstrating its ability to capture nearly the entire variation in the
equity yield slope.

To summarize, our model can reasonably reproduce the conditional
moments of aggregate quantities and asset prices observed in the data.
The model’s performance in capturing the countercyclical volatility
of returns, the conditional volatility of marginal value growth, and
the procyclical and sign-switching equity yield slope is noteworthy.
Our model demonstrates the importance of discount rate dynamics in
generating these observed phenomena.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385615K. Li and C. Xu

Table 7
Conditional moments in the benchmark calibration.

Average consumption growth

Average excess return

Integrated Volatility
Relative volatility of log( 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

)

Equity yield (1-year)

Equity yield slope

Convenience yields (12-month)

𝐸𝑡(𝛥𝑐)

𝐸𝑡(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )

𝐸𝑡(𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙)
𝜎𝑒𝑥𝑝∕𝑟𝑒𝑐 (𝛥 log(𝜇))
𝜎(𝛥 log(𝜇))

𝐸𝑡(𝑒𝑓
1 )
5 − 𝑒𝑓
𝐸𝑡(𝑒𝑓
1 )
𝐸𝑡(𝑦𝑐𝑦
12𝑚)

Expansion

Recession

Data

2.48

9.28

15.57

0.79

−3.22

1.59

0.31

Model

2.93

11.36

17.25

0.65

2.53

1.80

0.07

Data

−1.14

−12.99

18.34

1.67

10.89

−5.74

0.58

Model

−3.39

−22.43

17.87

1.93

8.56

−2.29

0.48

This table shows the conditional moments of aggregate quantities and asset prices in different phases of the business cycle. Consumption and
stock returns are from 1970 to 2020. Integrated volatility is computed as the square sum of the demeaned quarterly return. The growth rate of
the marginal value of intermediary net worth is computed as the growth rate of our relative tightness index. The sample period covers 1970 to
2020. Equity yields are from Giglio et al. (2023), covering the period from 1974Q3 to 2020Q3. Convenience yields data cover 2004 to 2020.
The column labeled ‘Model’ presents corresponding moments based on a very long simulation (10,000 years of artificial data) from our model.
Both model and data classify periods with a marginal value of net worth (relative tightness index) in the top 15% as recessions. The 15%
recession frequency matches the 16% NBER recession frequency from 1970 to 2020.

5.4. Equity term structure dynamics

5.5. Convenience yield dynamics

Our model is also capable of producing a countercyclical equity
term premium and procyclical equity yield slope, as well as their
close relationship with intermediary state variables, similar to what we
observe in the data. Table 8 presents the estimates from regressions
(10)–(13) using the intermediary model. Panel A displays results based
on the dividend-price ratio of the stock index, while Panel B presents re-
sults based on the RT index. The simulation confirms that in our model,
the equity yield slope is procyclical (a negative ̂𝛼1), the equity term
premium is countercyclical (a positive ̂𝛽1), and the expected changes
in yields are procyclical (a negative ̂𝛾1). Notably, the ̂𝜃1 estimate from
the expectation hypothesis regression is greater than one and closely
resembles the data counterpart, indicating that the variation in the
equity yield slope in our model, like that in the data, is primarily driven
by the expected change component.

Our model also performs well when we introduce real intermediary
shocks and assess the model-implied equity yield slope in comparison
to the actual data. This step is considerably challenging as the shock
series does not draw any information from the time-varying equity yield
slope. It critically evaluates the model’s ability to reproduce the equity
yield slope dynamics in the face of real-world and potentially non-
i.i.d. and non-normal shocks. The success of our model provides strong
support for the intermediary mechanism. To implement this exercise,
we transform the shocks to RT index to compute the corresponding
shocks to marginal value of net worth in the model:

log(𝜇𝑡+1) − log(𝜇𝑡) = 𝛥𝑅𝑇𝑡+1∕𝜎𝛥𝑅𝑇 × 𝜎𝛥 log(𝜇),

where 𝜎𝛥𝑅𝑇 represent the sample standard deviation of RT index
shocks, and 𝜎𝛥 log(𝜇) denote the standard deviation of log(𝜇𝑡) shocks from
a long simulation in the model. In particular, we focus on our model’s
ability to explain the equity yield dynamics during the 2008 financial
crisis. Specifically, we start with the assumption that the economy was
in a steady state during the first quarter of 2007. We feed the time
series of log(𝜇𝑡) shocks derived from the data into the model. We then
compare the model-implied equity yield slope with the data. Fig. 4
illustrates the equity yield slope in the data and the one generated
by our model during the 2008 financial crisis. We observe that when
real shocks are incorporated, the model produces a steep, downward-
sloping equity yield curve. The model accounts for approximately
50% of the fluctuations during the financial crisis, consistent with the
empirical evidence in Section 6.1, which indicates that the discount
rate channel explains about half of the equity yield fluctuations.

In this section, we discuss how our model mechanism explains
the evidence documented by Van Binsbergen et al. (2021) for the
convenience yield, which includes its countercyclical behavior, its pre-
dictability for bond excess returns, and its acyclical slope. We also
quantitatively confirm that our model can replicate this evidence. In
the last subsection, we analyze the behavior of the convenience yield
during the COVID-19 crisis and provide insights within the context of
our model.

5.5.1. Cyclicality of convenience yield

≤ 𝑅𝑔,𝑡

In our model, the convenience yield and its cyclicality are closely
related to the slackness of the participation constraint. In Eq. (30),
when the participation constraint is not binding, the loans 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡, 𝑅𝑔,𝑡,
and 𝑅𝐹 𝐼,𝑡 are equivalent, acting as perfect substitutes. In contrast, we
≤ 𝑅𝐹 𝐼,𝑡 when the intermediary sector is constrained.
have 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡
The parameters 𝜃𝐹 𝐼 and 𝜃𝑔 represent the amount of net worth occupied
when investing an additional dollar into these assets. Investing in a
security with higher collateralizability occupies less of the net worth.
When the economy enters the binding region, the bank’s net worth
becomes increasingly valuable, making investments in assets with low
collateralizability more expensive. Market-clearing conditions require
the interbank rate and bond yield to increase. The interbank rate will
increase more than the bond yield because of the lower collateral-
izability of interbank loans. This mechanism causes the convenience
yield, 𝑅𝐹 𝐼,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑔,𝑡, to be countercyclical, spiking during recessions
when intermediaries become constrained, which is consistent with the
empirical evidence in Van Binsbergen et al. (2021).

Quantitatively, the model’s results regarding the cyclical pattern of
convenience yields also align with the data. As highlighted in Table 7,
the 12-month model-implied convenience yields spike to 48 basis points
during recessions and remain close to 0 in normal times. This mirrors
the data’s counterpart which peaks at 58 basis points during downturns
and hovers around 31 basis points during regular times.

5.5.2. Bond return predictability

The empirical finding that convenience yields can predict the Trea-
sury bond risk premium also aligns with our model prediction. In
our model setup, government bonds share the same risk source as
convenience yields. Due to the persistence of shocks to bank net worth,
long-term government bonds are riskier. Consequently, our model can
generate an unconditionally upward-sloping bond yield curve. Fur-
thermore, the term premium of government bonds is countercyclical
and shares the same risk source as convenience yields, serving as the
primary mechanism for generating bond return predictability. Panel A

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385616K. Li and C. Xu

Table 8
Financial intermediary model: Expectation hypothesis regression.

Panel A: Dividend-Price Ratio

Data(Panel)

Model

Data(US)

Model

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

Coeff.

𝑅2

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

Coeff.

𝑅2

𝜃1

1.378
(0.193)
405
0.32

1.257
1.018
1.499
0.37
0.30
0.43

𝛼1

−0.220
(0.061)
441
0.37

−0.143
−0.177
−0.112
0.59
0.51
0.66

𝛽1

0.169
(0.085)
405
0.05

0.044
0.007
0.078
0.02
0.00
0.06

Panel B: Relative Tightness Index

−0.0493
(0.0178)
147
0.51

−0.0342
−0.0413
−0.0045
0.93
0.34
0.98

0.0082
(0.0185)
135
0.01

0.0073
−0.0004
0.0197
0.02
0.00
0.07

𝛾1

−0.395
(0.119)
405
0.20

−0.186
−0.227
−0.148
0.23
0.17
0.30

−0.0596
(0.0278)
135
0.21

−0.0416
−0.0601
−0.0053
0.33
0.12
0.41

median
5pctl
95pctl
median
5pctl
95pctl

median
5pctl
95pctl
median
5pctl
95pctl

This table presents regression results for data and model. We estimate

1,𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,
)

𝑖=1

∑5

5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓
(
𝑟𝑓
𝑖,𝑡+12 − 𝑟𝑓
1
5
(
𝑒𝑓
𝑖−1,𝑡+12 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑖=1(𝑖 − 1)
(
𝑖−1,𝑡+12 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡+12

𝑖−1,𝑡
)

∑5

1
5
∑5

= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+12,
)

= 𝛾0 + 𝛾1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+12,

𝑛,𝑡+12 is the 12-month ahead return on an n-year dividend futures, 𝑒𝑓

= 𝜃0 + 𝜃1(𝑒𝑓
where 𝑟𝑓
𝑛,𝑡+12 is the 12-month ahead n-year forward equity yield, and 𝑥𝑡
measures the economic state. Panel A uses the dividend-price ratio, Panel B the relative tightness index. Results come from monthly rolling
regressions. Maturity is in years. Standard errors are Newey–West corrected with 12 lags. Equity yields and returns are from S&P 500, Euro
Stoxx 50 and Nikkei 225 dividend futures, covering December 2004 to February 2017. Model results are the median, 5th, and 95th percentiles
from quarterly rolling regressions of 1,000 simulation paths, each 100 years.

1,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+12,

𝑖=1(𝑖 − 1)

5,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓

𝑖−1,𝑡

1
5

Fig. 4. Equity Yield Slope during Financial Crisis: Data versus Model.
This figure illustrates the equity yield slopes during the 2008 financial crisis. The realized slope in the data is measured as the difference between 5-year and 1-year forward equity
yields based on S&P 500 dividend futures contracts. The model-implied yield slope is computed by feeding real shocks to the marginal value of net worth into the intermediary
model. Specifically, we begin by presuming that the economy in the first quarter of 2007 was at a steady state. We then use shocks to the RT index as a basis to determine
equivalent shocks to the net worth’s marginal value in the model. Concretely, this relationship is represented as:

log(𝜇𝑡+1) − log(𝜇𝑡) = 𝛥𝑅𝑇𝑡+1∕𝜎𝛥𝑅𝑇 × 𝜎𝛥 log(𝜇),

where 𝜎𝛥𝑅𝑇 represents the sample standard deviation of RT index shocks, and 𝜎𝛥 log(𝜇) denote the standard deviation of log(𝜇𝑡) shocks from a long simulation in the model.

of Fig. 5 shows the convenience yield and expected 2-year government
bond excess return as a function of the net worth share. When the
participation constraint is not binding, the convenience yield remains
flat at zero. However, as bank net worth falls into the binding region,

the convenience yield rises dramatically, along with the expected excess
return of 2-year government bonds.

Table 9 presents the bond predictability regressions using both the
data and our model, confirming the findings of Van Binsbergen et al.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385617K. Li and C. Xu

Fig. 5. Convenience Yields in Intermediary Model.
Panel A shows the convenience yield and expected 2-year government bond excess return as functions of state variable: bank net worth share, ̂𝑛. Panel B shows the decomposition
of the term structure slope of convenience yields. The slope is decomposed into the term premium of convenience yields and expected changes in convenience yields, plotted as
functions of ̂𝑛. The term ̂𝑛𝑠𝑠 denotes the steady-state net worth share in this economy, suggested by a long simulation from the model, ̂𝑛𝑏 denotes the binding threshold, and ̂𝑛 ≤ ̂𝑛𝑏
is the region in which the constraint is binding. The parameters are based on the benchmark calibration summarized in Table 5.

(2021) that convenience yields can forecast future government bond
returns. Notably, our model successfully reproduces this predictability
with a similar magnitude. Besides convenience yields, we include the
1-year equity yield, equity yield slope, and RT index as additional
predictors.

Since the financial accelerator effect simultaneously influences eq-
uity yields, bond yields, and convenience yields, our model suggests
that equity yields should positively predict bond excess returns, the
equity yield slope should negatively predict bond excess returns, and
the RT index should positively predict bond excess returns. The data
support these predictions from our model, revealing that the equity
yield, equity yield slope, and RT index all significantly predict future
government bond returns.

5.5.3. Term structure of convenience yield

Our model can potentially explain the acyclical convenience yield
slope as well. We decompose the convenience yield slope into the term
premium of convenience yields and expected changes in convenience
yields to investigate the cyclicality of each component. Specifically, we
use the spread between 12-month and 6-month convenience yields as
the benchmark and decompose it with the decomposition framework

similar to Eq. (8) in Proposition 2
[
𝐸

12𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
𝑦𝑐𝑦

6𝑚,𝑡 =

− 𝐸

)

(

)]

(
𝑟𝑐𝑦
6𝑚,𝑡+6

𝑟𝑐𝑦
12𝑚,𝑡+6

1
2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
term premium of convenience yield
]
(
1
𝑦𝑐𝑦
6𝑚,𝑡+6
2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected change in convenience yields

− 𝑦𝑐𝑦
6𝑚,𝑡

𝐸𝑡

)

+

[

.

(36)

Panel B of Fig. 5 plots the term premium of convenience yields and
the expected change in convenience yields as functions of bank net
worth share ̂𝑛. Unlike the case of equity yields, where the expected
change component always dominates, the convenience yield slope is
hump-shaped in the empirically relevant region. The expected change
component dominates when net worth is low, and the term premium
component dominates when net worth is high. The difference in the
mean-reversion speed between equity yields and convenience yields
generates these contrasting empirical patterns.

Comparing Panel A of Fig. 3 and Panel A of Fig. 5, we observe
that, when the participation constraint is not binding, the convenience
yield becomes zero and does not change with net worth, whereas
equity yields continue to decrease with net worth. This is because
the convenience yield only depends on the Lagrange multiplier on

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385618K. Li and C. Xu

Table 9
Bond return predictability.

Data(US)

Model

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

Coeff.

𝑅2

𝛽𝑐𝑦

2.55
(0.81)
199
0.15

2.65
2.16
3.29
0.57
0.50
0.62

𝛽𝑒1

0.04
(0.02)
147
0.10

0.22
0.19
0.24
0.63
0.58
0.69

𝛽𝑠𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒

−0.07
(0.03)
147
0.14

−0.32
−0.36
−0.28
0.63
0.57
0.68

𝛽𝑟𝑡

0.0045
(0.002)
199
0.12

0.0109
0.0014
0.0146
0.58
0.21
0.68

median
5pctl
95pctl
median
5pctl
95pctl

This table shows the results of bond return predictability regressions. Specifically, we run the following regression:

𝑟𝑥𝑔𝑜𝑣

2,𝑡+12 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡+12,

in which 𝑟𝑥𝑔𝑜𝑣
2,𝑡+12 is the 12-month ahead excess return to 2-year government bonds and 𝑥𝑡 is the bond return predictor. We report the regression
results using the 6-month convenience yield, 1-year equity yield, equity yield slope, and relative tightness index as predictors. The corresponding
slope estimates are 𝛽𝑐𝑦, 𝛽𝑒1, 𝛽𝑠𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒 and 𝛽𝑟𝑡. All the results are based on monthly rolling regressions. Standard errors are Newey–West corrected
with 12 lags. Convenience yields and bond premium data are from January 2004 to July 2020. We also report the corresponding simulation
results from the financial intermediary model. We run 1,000 simulations with 100 years of artificial data for each sample path and calculate
the median, 5th percentile, and 95th percentile estimates from quarterly rolling regressions.

the participation constraint 𝛾𝑡. Convenience yields become zero when
constraints are not binding and 𝛾𝑡 = 0. However, the discount rate
of dividend strips depends not only on 𝛾𝑡 but also on the marginal
value of net worth 𝜇𝑡, which will be greater than one even in the non-
binding region because of the possibility of binding constraints in the
future. In the non-binding region, the flat convenience yield makes the
mean-reversion effect negligible; therefore, the convenience yield slope
largely reflects the term premium.

According to the decomposition Eq. (36), we run the following four
regressions that are analogous to the equity yield regression (10)–(13):

6𝑚,𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,

= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+6,

1
2

12𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
𝑦𝑐𝑦
(
12𝑚,𝑡+6 − 𝑟𝑐𝑦
𝑟𝑐𝑦
(
6𝑚,𝑡+6 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
𝑦𝑐𝑦
)

)

6𝑚,𝑡+6
)

(37)

6𝑚,𝑡

6𝑚,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+6,

1
2
(
6𝑚,𝑡+6 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
𝑦𝑐𝑦

6𝑚,𝑡
= 𝜃0 + 𝜃1(𝑦𝑐𝑦

= 𝛾0 + 𝛾1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+6,
1
12𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
2
with 𝑟12𝑚,𝑡+6 representing the 6-month return to a long position in a
12-month convenience yield, which can be implemented by taking a
long position in the box strategy and a short position in a 12-month
government bond and holding it for 6 months. The variable 𝑥𝑡 measures
the state of the economy. We include dividend-price ratios and the RT
index in our empirical tests.

Table 10 reports the regression results for the data and the model.
In the U.S. data, the ̂𝛼1 estimate is close to zero, suggesting that the
convenience yield slope is acyclical. The ̂𝛽1 estimate is positive, sug-
gesting that the term premium of convenience yields is countercyclical.
The ̂𝛾1 estimate is negative, suggesting that the expected change in
convenience yields is procyclical. It is noteworthy that the estimates of
̂𝛽1 and ̂𝛾1 are of similar magnitude, which indicates that the effect from
the countercyclical term premium and procyclical expected changes
largely offset each other. This point is also confirmed in the expectation
hypothesis regression. The ̂𝜃1 estimate is close to zero, suggesting that
the term premium and expected changes work in the opposite direction
and cancel out each other.

Our model can also reproduce this pattern: the ̂𝛼1 estimate from the
simulated data is insignificant from zero; the estimate of ̂𝛽1 is positive,
̂𝛾1 is negative, and they largely cancel out each other. These findings
are consistent with the intuition outlined in Fig. 5.

literature. Our model can provide insights to help explain these obser-
vations.

The upper panels of Fig. 6 display the monthly time series of
convenience yields in the U.S. and Euro markets.10 It is evident that
convenience yields for both markets spiked during the 2008 financial
crisis, and the Euro convenience yield also experienced a spike during
the European financial crisis in 2012. The COVID-19 crisis presents
an unusual period, as the convenience yield remains relatively flat.
The lower panels offer a more granular view of the daily series for
the U.S. market during the 2008 financial crisis and the COVID-19
crisis. During the financial crisis, the convenience yield spiked sharply
when intermediary constraints tightened. In stark contrast, during the
COVID-19 crisis, the convenience yield exhibited an unusual dip, briefly
turning ‘‘inconvenient’’ in late March 2020.

He et al. (2022) argue that fluctuations in Treasury yields and
spreads in March 2020 can be attributed to the interaction between sell-
ing pressure from large Treasury holders and intermediation frictions,
such as regulatory constraints like the Supplementary Leverage Ratio
(SLR), which was implemented after 2008. During this period, investors
face higher costs related to reverse Treasury repo funding. They are
concerned about potential future liquidity shocks and anticipate a
reduced collateral value for Treasuries in future financing.

Modeling the external supply of Treasury or regulatory changes is
beyond the scope of our paper. However, He et al. (2022)’s argument
can be interpreted as a change in the collateralizability parameter 𝜃𝑔
within our model. During the COVID-19 period, because of selling
pressure and regulatory change, the collateralizability of Treasury de-
creases, meaning that investing in Treasuries occupies more bank net
worth than before. This corresponds to an increase in 𝜃𝑔. If external
factors cause 𝜃𝑔 to approach 𝜃𝐹 𝐼 or even surpass it (𝜃𝑔 > 𝜃𝐹 𝐼 ), a flat or
even inverted convenience yield will be observed.

6. An extended model with predictable dividend growth

In this section, we extend our baseline model by introducing pre-
dictable dividend growth and evaluate its capability in capturing the
dynamics of the equity yield slope.

We first dissect the variation of the equity yield slope to understand
its source. By decomposing it into two channels – the discount rate
channel and the expected dividend growth channel – we observe that

5.5.4. Convenience yield during COVID-19 crisis

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the convenience yield exhibited
distinctive patterns that have drawn significant attention from the

10 We are grateful to Dr. William Diamond for generously providing the
convenience yields data from Diamond and Van Tassel (2021), which greatly
contributed to our analysis.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385619K. Li and C. Xu

Table 10
Term structure of convenience yield.

Panel A: Dividend-Price Ratio

Data

Model

Data

Model

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

Coeff.

𝑅2

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

Coeff.

𝑅2

𝛼1

−0.050
(0.067)
199
0.01

−0.034
−0.243
0.118
0.02
0.00
0.13

−0.002
(0.009)
199
0.00

−0.044
−0.068
0.003
0.30
0.01
0.63

𝛽1

0.267
(0.123)
193
0.14

0.351
0.221
0.447
0.10
0.03
0.20

𝛾1

−0.317
(0.071)
193
0.21

−0.384
−0.564
−0.239
0.09
0.06
0.14

𝜃1

0.449
(0.141)
193
0.11

1.189
0.706
1.480
0.26
0.10
0.37

Panel B: Relative Tightness Index

0.030
(0.018)
193
0.09

0.075
0.007
0.137
0.14
0.01
0.32

−0.034
(0.014)
193
0.12

−0.121
−0.154
−0.029
0.29
0.21
0.36

median
5pctl
95pctl
median
5pctl
95pctl

median
5pctl
95pctl
median
5pctl
95pctl

This table shows the average convenience yield slope and regression results of both the data and model. We run the following four regressions:

6𝑚,𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,

= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+6,

)

𝑦𝑐𝑦
12𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
(
𝑟𝑐𝑦
12𝑚,𝑡+6 − 𝑟𝑐𝑦
1
2
(
𝑦𝑐𝑦
6𝑚,𝑡+6 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
1
6𝑚,𝑡
2
)
(
6𝑚,𝑡+6 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦
𝑦𝑐𝑦

6𝑚,𝑡

)

6𝑚,𝑡+6

= 𝛾0 + 𝛾1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+6,
12𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑦𝑐𝑦

1
2

= 𝜃0 + 𝜃1(𝑦𝑐𝑦
in which 𝑟12𝑚,𝑡+6 is the 6-month ahead return to a long position in the 12-month convenience yield and 𝑥𝑡 is the variable that measures the state
of the economy. Panel A reports the results based on the dividend-price ratio, and Panel B reports the results based on the RT index. All the
results are based on monthly rolling regressions. Returns and yields are in percentage terms. Standard errors are Newey–West corrected with
12 lags. Convenience yields data are from January 2004 to July 2020. We also report the corresponding simulation results from the financial
intermediary model. We run 1,000 simulations with 100 years of artificial data for each sample path and calculate the median, 5th percentile,
and 95th percentile estimates from quarterly rolling regressions.

6𝑚,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+6,

Fig. 6. Convenience Yields over Time.
The figure is divided into four panels. The Panels A and B display the monthly time series of convenience yields in both U.S. and Euro markets. The Panels C and D provide a
detailed look at the daily series during two significant periods: the financial crisis and the COVID-19 crisis. The convenience yield is calculated as the difference between the box
rate and the corresponding Treasury yield with the same maturity, following the methodology in Van Binsbergen et al. (2021).
Source: The data source is Diamond and Van Tassel (2021).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385620K. Li and C. Xu

Table 11
Discount rate slopes.

Average
(sd.)
Expansion
(sd.)
Recession
(sd.)

Discount rate slope
Dividend slope

Coeff.
(sd.)
obs
𝑅2

Panel A: Discount Rate Slope

BVAR

0.21
(1.28)
1.54
(0.79)
−9.34
(2.53)

Panel B: Variance Decomposition

BVAR

56.88%
43.12%

Kalman

−0.30
(1.24)
1.04
(0.71)
−9.92
(2.49)

Kalman

55.18%
44.82%

Panel C: Regression on Relative Tightness

Kalman

−0.039
(0.010)
147
0.57

BVAR

−0.041
(0.010)
147
0.61

IBES

0.80
(1.07)
1.70
(0.82)
−5.68
(1.76)

IBES

54.31%
45.69%

IBES

−0.012
(0.015)
147
0.06

Yield slope

1.20
(1.77)
3.12
(0.86)
−12.54
(3.94)

Yield slope

−0.049
(0.018)
147
0.51

This table shows the properties of discount rate slopes. We form dividend growth expectations and subtract them from the
equity yield slope to compute the discount rate slope. We construct out-of-sample dividend growth expectations using the
latent variable model (column ‘‘Kalman‘‘) from Jagannathan and Liu (2019), the Bayesian VAR model (column ‘‘BVAR’’)
from Bansal et al. (2021), and IBES data (column ‘‘IBES’’) from Ulrich et al. (2023). Panel A shows the conditional moments
of discount rate slopes based on the NBER recession classification. Panel B shows the variance decomposition of the equity
yield slope into the discount rate slope and expected changes in dividend growth. Panel C shows the regression results of
discount rate slopes on the RT index. The equity yield slope is based on S&P 500 index dividend futures contracts, covering
the period from December 2004 to February 2017.

each channel contributes to roughly 50% of the variation. Our baseline
intermediary model successfully accounts for the variation stemming
from the discount rate channel.

Building on this, we incorporate predictable dividend growth into
our baseline model. This extended version demonstrates an enhanced
ability to account for nearly the entire variation of the equity yield
slope.

et al. (2021), and IBES data from Ulrich et al. (2023).11 Panel A
of Table 11 shows the conditional moments of discount rate slopes
derived from these methods. Although displaying less cyclical variation
than equity yield slopes, all three methods yield strongly procyclical
discount rate slopes, with upward slopes in expansions and downward
slopes in recessions.

Next, we perform a variance decomposition of the equity yield slope
into the discount rate slope and expected changes in dividend growth:

6.1. The discount rate channel and the expected dividend growth channel

(

𝑣𝑎𝑟

)

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡

(

= 𝑐𝑜𝑣

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡

, 𝜃𝑛,𝑡 − 𝜃1,𝑡

)

−𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝑒𝑓

𝑛,𝑡 −𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡

, 𝑔𝑑

𝑛,𝑡 −𝑔𝑑

1,𝑡). (39)

In our benchmark model, we purposefully exclude the expected
dividend growth channel to focus on investigating the impact of the
financial accelerator effect through the discount rate channel. In this
section, we first empirically evaluate the relative importance of these
two channels. We then evaluate the performance of the intermediary
model against other leading asset pricing models, specifically through
the discount rate channel.

From Eq. (2), it is clear that the forward equity yield depends on
both the discount rate and expected dividend growth. Therefore, the
equity yield slope also depends on the discount rate slope and expected
changes in dividend growth:

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑒𝑓
𝑒𝑓

1,𝑡 =

)

(𝜃𝑛,𝑡 − 𝜃1,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
discount rate slope

−

)

(
𝑔𝑑
𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑔𝑑
1,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected changes in dividend growth

.

(38)

According to Eq. (38), the forward equity yield will be upward-sloping
(downward-sloping) if the discount rate is upward-sloping (downward-
sloping) or if the expected average dividend growth rate is decreasing
(increasing). Both the procyclical discount rate slope and counter-
cyclical expected changes in dividend growth could contribute to the
procyclicality of the equity yield slope.

To analyze the properties of discount rate slopes, we use various
methods to form dividend growth expectations and subtract them from
the equity yield slope. To avoid look-ahead bias, we construct out-of-
sample dividend growth expectations using the latent variable model
from Jagannathan and Liu (2019), the Bayesian VAR model from Bansal

Dividing both sides of the equation by the variance of the equity yield
slope gives a variance decomposition of the equity yield slope into the
contribution of the discount rate slope and changes in dividend growth.
Panel B of Table 11 presents the results. Across all three methods, the
discount rate slope variation accounts for approximately 50% of the
equity yield slope fluctuation.

To investigate the relationship between the discount rate slope and
financial intermediary constraints, we regress the implied discount rate
slopes on the RT index. Panel C of Table 11 shows the results. In line
with our model predictions, the results indicate a negative relationship
between the RT index and discount rate slopes, suggesting that when
financial intermediaries face binding constraints, the discount rate is
high in the short run, but investors expect it to decrease and mean
revert to the steady state in the long run.

The cyclical pattern of the equity term structure imposes a strong
discipline on the speed of mean reversion for any standard asset pricing
model. In Internet Appendix E, we show that in the standard calibration
of the long-run risk model (Bansal and Yaron, 2004) and the habit
model (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999), the mean reversion speed of
discount rates is too slow such that the implied equity yield slope is
countercyclical.

11 We would like to express our gratitude to Dr. Stephan Florig for kindly
providing the aggregated IBES dividend forecast data from Ulrich et al. (2023),
which has significantly contributed to our analysis.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385621K. Li and C. Xu

Table 12
Aggregate moments: the Model with predictable growth.

Panel A: Aggregate Quantities

Average consumption growth

Volatility of consumption growth

Average dividend growth

Volatility of dividend growth

Corr of consumption and investment

Intermediary capital ratio

Book-to-market ratio of financial intermediary
Relative volatility of log( 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

) in recessions

Sensitivity of 1-year dividend growth 𝑔𝑑

1,𝑡+1 on standardized 𝜇𝑡

Panel B: Asset Prices

Equity premium

Volatility of equity return

Average log PD ratio

Volatility of log PD ratio

Mean of equity yield slope

Volatility of equity yield slope

Mean of convenience yields (12-month)

Volatility of convenience yields (12-month)

2-year bond premium

𝐸(𝛥𝑐)

𝜎(𝛥𝑐)

𝐸(𝛥𝑑)

𝜎(𝛥𝑑)

𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝛥𝑐, 𝛥𝑑)

𝐸(𝑁∕𝑄)

𝐸(1∕𝜇𝑡)
𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑐 (𝛥 log(𝜇))
𝜎(𝛥 log(𝜇))

𝜙𝑔𝑑

𝐸(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )

𝜎(𝑟𝑚)

𝐸(𝑝 − 𝑑)

𝜎(𝑝 − 𝑑)
5 − 𝑒𝑓
𝐸(𝑒𝑓
1 )
𝜎(𝑒𝑓
5 − 𝑒𝑓
1 )
𝐸(𝑦𝑐𝑦
12𝑚)
𝜎(𝑦𝑐𝑦
12𝑚)
𝐸(𝑟𝑥𝑔𝑜𝑣
𝑡+1)

Data

Model

1.90

2.25

1.39

1.96

2.48

1.20

12.54

11 21

0.47

0.21

0.65

1.67

0.77

0.30

0.69

2.31

−1.15

−1.30

6.09

19.12

3.41

0.47

0.37

6.69

0.35

0.18

0.6

6.37

17.83

2.72

0.13

1.97

3.35

0.11

0.22

0.62

This table presents summary statistics for aggregate consumption growth, dividends, and asset prices based on the
model with predictable growth. The volatility of consumption growth and the predictable components are calibrated
to broadly match the aggregate consumption volatility and the sensitivity of dividend growth rate on 𝜇𝑡 in the data.
𝛿 is recalibrated to 0.015 to keep the equity premium at the same level as the benchmark calibration. We recalibrate
𝜃𝑙 = 0.22 and 𝜃𝑔 = 0.18 to match bond risk premium and convenience yield volatility. Other parameters are the same
as the benchmark calibration. The data for aggregate quantities are real values, sampled at an annual frequency, and
cover the sample period from 1930 to 2020, whenever the data are available. Equity yields are from Giglio et al.
(2023), covering the period from 1974Q3 to 2020Q3. The sensitivity of dividend growth rate on marginal value
of net worth is obtained by running a quarterly regression of one-year ahead realized dividend growth rate on RT
index:

𝑔𝑑
1,𝑡+4 = 𝜙0 + 𝜙𝑔𝑑 𝑅𝑇𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡+4.
Convenience yields and bond premium data cover the sample period of 2004–2020. The column labeled ‘Model’
presents corresponding moments based on a very long simulation (10,000 years of artificial data) from our model.

Our baseline intermediary model generates a procyclical equity
yield slope through the strong mean-reversion of discount rates. How-
ever, when the expected dividend growth channel is not considered, the
model-implied equity yield slope is less volatile than that observed in
the data. By extending our model to allow for countercyclical expected
changes in dividend growth, we could bring the model-implied equity
yield slope dynamics into closer alignment with the data, which we
explore in the next subsection.

6.2. A model with predictable growth rates

In this subsection, we introduce a model that incorporates pre-
dictable dividend growth, showcasing its ability in capturing the dy-
namics of the equity yield slope.

In our extended model, we allow the expected growth rate to pos-
itively depend on the net worth share. This specification is important
for two reasons. First, empirical data show that the expected dividend
growth is inversely related to the RT index; this setup directly cap-
tures this empirical relationship. Second, to achieve a more procyclical
equity yield slope, it is essential for both the discount rate channel
and the dividend growth channel to work in the same direction. Our
setup ensures a strong correlation between the discount rate slope and
dividend growth slope.12

12 Simply introducing a long-run risk component in the dividend process
fails to produce a more procyclical equity yield slope. The strong correlation

Specifically, the growth rate of output is formalized as follows:

𝑔𝑡+1 =

(𝜇𝑦( ̂𝑛𝑡) + 𝜎𝜀𝑦,𝑡+1

= exp

𝑌𝑡+1
𝑌𝑡
𝜇𝑦( ̂𝑛𝑡) = 𝑎𝑦 + 𝑏𝑦 ̂𝑛𝑡,

) ,

(40)

in which 𝑎𝑦 and 𝑏𝑦 are positive constants. In this setup, the expected
output growth rises with an increase in the net worth share. This
correlation suggests that banks with greater leverage may be inefficient
in managing their capital, leading to deadweight loss in the economy.
This aligns well with prevailing literature assumptions, notably Gertler
et al. (2020), which posits that economies face higher management
costs when bank capital is low. The dividend process is then defined
as:

log

)

( 𝐷𝑡+1
𝐷𝑡

= 𝜇𝑑 + 𝜑(𝜇𝑦( ̂𝑛𝑡) − ̄𝜇𝑦) + 𝜑𝜎𝜀𝑦,𝑡+1 + 𝜑𝑑 𝜎𝜀𝑑,𝑡+1,

(41)

in which ̄𝜇𝑦 is the unconditional mean of consumption growth.

In the data, there is a close relation between the expected dividend
growth rate and the intermediary state variable. We run the following
regression of one-year ahead realized dividend growth rate on the RT
index:

𝑔𝑑
1,𝑡+4 = 𝜙0 + 𝜙𝑔𝑑 𝑅𝑇𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡+4.

(42)

between the discount rate slope and dividend growth slope requires the long-
run risk component to be significant enough. However, a strong and persistent
dividend growth will in turn hinder the mean reversion of intermediary net
worth, damping the discount rate channel, which results in a less procyclical
equity yield slope.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385622K. Li and C. Xu

Table 13
Conditional moments: the model with predictable growth.

Panel A: Conditional Moments

Expansion

Data

Model

Average consumption growth

Average excess return

Integrated Volatility
Relative volatility of log( 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

)

Equity yield (1-year)

Equity yield slope

Convenience yields (12-month)

𝐸𝑡(𝛥𝑐)

𝐸𝑡(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )

𝐸𝑡(𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙)
𝜎𝑒𝑥𝑝∕𝑟𝑒𝑐 (𝛥 log(𝜇))
𝜎(𝛥 log(𝜇))

𝐸𝑡(𝑒𝑓
1 )
5 − 𝑒𝑓
𝐸𝑡(𝑒𝑓
1 )
𝐸𝑡(𝑦𝑐𝑦
12𝑚)

2.48

9.28

15.57

0.79

−3.22

1.59

0.31

2.94

12.59

18.58

0.44

0.95

3.04

0.05

Recession

Data

−1.14

−12.99

18.34

1.67

10.89

−5.74

0.58

Model

−3.53

−28.86

21.80

2.31

11.81

−4.10

0.48

Panel B: Discount Rate Slope vs. Dividend Growth Slope

Equity yield slope

Discount rate slope

Expected dividend growth slope

5 − 𝑒𝑓
𝐸𝑡(𝑒𝑓
1 )
𝐸𝑡(𝜃5 − 𝜃1)
5 − 𝑔𝑑
𝐸𝑡(𝑔𝑑
1 )

Expansion

Recession

Difference

3.04

2.53

−0.51

−4.10

−1.04

3.06

7.14

3.57

−3.57

Panel A shows the conditional moments of aggregate quantities and asset prices in different phases of the business cycle. Consumption and
stock returns are from 1970 to 2020. Integrated volatility is computed as the square sum of the demeaned quarterly return. The growth rate of
the marginal value of intermediary net worth is computed as the growth rate of our relative tightness index. The sample period covers 1970
to 2020. Equity yields are based on S&P 500 index dividend futures contracts, covering 2004 to 2017. Convenience yields data cover 2004 to
2020. The column labeled ‘Model’ presents corresponding moments based on a very long simulation (10,000 years of artificial data) from the
model with predictable growth. Both model and data classify periods with a marginal value of net worth (relative tightness index) in the top
15% as recessions. The 15% recession frequency matches the 16% NBER recession frequency from 1970 to 2020. Panel B reports the discount
rate slope and dividend growth slope in expansions and recessions from the model with predictable growth.

Empirical analysis of data from 1974Q3 to 2020Q3 provides a sig-
nificant point estimate 𝜙𝑔𝑑 = −1.15%, indicating that a one standard
deviation increase in the marginal value of intermediary net worth
leads to a 1.15% decline in the expected dividend growth rate a year
ahead. We use this to guide our calibration.

For calibration, we adjust the volatility parameter 𝜎 and mean
growth coefficients 𝑎𝑦 and 𝑏𝑦 to broadly match the mean and volatility
of aggregate consumption growth as well as the sensitivity of expected
dividend growth to constraint tightness. Because the model features
persistent consumption growth, it will produce a higher equity pre-
mium compared to the i.i.d. growth case. To keep the level of risk
premium the same as the benchmark case, we increase the transfer
parameter for new banks, 𝛿, to 0.015. We also recalibrate the collater-
alizability parameter 𝜃𝑔 and 𝜃𝐹 𝐼 to match the government bond excess
return and convenience yield volatility. All other model parameters are
kept unchanged from the benchmark calibration.

The aggregate moments are reported in Table 12. The unconditional
moments closely resemble those from our benchmark calibration, but
with heightened volatilities in the price-to-dividend ratio and equity
yield slope due to additional variations in dividend growth rates, bring-
ing the model-generated moments much closer to the data. Because
dividend growth is persistent, shocks to intermediary net worth have a
more lasting impact, resulting in a steeper unconditional equity yield
slope.

Table 13 reports the conditional moments from the model. Com-
pared to the benchmark calibration, the extended model offers much
better consistency with observed business cycle fluctuations in inte-
grated volatility and equity yield. Notably, the extended model can now
account for the fluctuation of the equity yield slope over the business
cycle. The model generates an upward-sloping yield slope of 3.04%
in expansion and a downward-sloping yield slope of −4.10%, with a
difference of 7.14% between expansion and recession, very close to the
difference of 7.33% in the data.

To better understand these fluctuations, we decompose the equity
yield slope into its discount rate and dividend growth components, as
described in Eq. (38). As discussed in the benchmark model, due to the
mean reversion of risk prices, the discount rate slope is upward-sloping
in expansion and downward-sloping in recession. Similarly, due to the
mean reversion of the expected dividend growth rate, the dividend

growth slope is downward-sloping in expansion and upward-sloping
in recession, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Panel A demonstrates that a low
net worth in banks results in lower short-term dividend growth, but
higher long-term growth due to mean reversion, yielding an upward-
sloping dividend growth slope. Conversely, a high net worth results in
a downward-sloping dividend growth slope. Panel B further elucidates
how the interplay between the procyclical discount rate slope and the
countercyclical dividend growth slope amplifies the procyclicality of
the equity yield slope.

Panel B of Table 13 reports the discount rate slope and dividend
growth slope in expansion and recession from our model. Indeed, the
downward-sloping discount rate slope and upward-sloping dividend
growth slope in recession both contribute to generating a strongly
downward-sloping equity yield slope. A variance decomposition as
in Eq. (7) shows that the discount rate slope fluctuation accounts for
50.4% of the equity yield slope fluctuation in our model, close to our
estimates in the data.

7. Conclusion

In this paper, we study the cyclical variation of the equity term
structure. New empirical facts show that the term structure slope of
equity yields is highly procyclical (i.e., positively sloped in expan-
sions and negatively sloped in recessions), whereas the equity term
premium is countercyclical. By offering an equity yield decomposition
framework, we decompose the term structure of equity yields into an
equity term premium and a mean reversion component that reflects
expected changes in equity yields. We show that in order to reconcile
the seemingly contradictory relationship between equity yield curves
and the equity term premium, the mean reversion component must be
strong enough to drive the procyclical fluctuations in the overall equity
yield term structure.

To explain the above-mentioned cyclical patterns, we propose a
financial intermediary-based asset pricing model. This model not only
captures the cyclical behavior of the equity term structure but also
accommodates countercyclical convenience yields that predict bond
risk premium, as documented in Van Binsbergen et al. (2021). Within
our framework, time-varying leverage constraints on intermediaries
endogenously give rise to strong mean reversion in yields. Guided by

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385623K. Li and C. Xu

Fig. 7. Discount Rate Slope vs. Dividend Growth Slope in the Extended Model.
Panel A illustrates the expected one-period growth rate as a function of the state variable: bank net worth share, ̂𝑛. The arrows show the direction in which the state variable is
expected to move. Panel B shows the decomposition of the equity yield slope into the discount rate slope and the dividend growth slope, each as a function of ̂𝑛. The term ̂𝑛𝑠𝑠
denotes the steady-state net worth share in this economy, suggested by a long simulation from the model. ̂𝑛𝑏 denotes the binding threshold, and ̂𝑛 ≤ ̂𝑛𝑏 is the region in which the
constraint is binding. The parameters are detailed in Section 6.2.

this model, we develop a novel empirical approach to estimate the
relative tightness of these constraints (i.e., the Relative Tightness Index)
from the cross-sectional returns of various asset classes. Our empirical
and quantitative results confirm that this index significantly influences
the slopes of equity yields and the behavior of convenience yields.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kai Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Vi-
sualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Chenjie Xu: Writing – re-
view & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization.

Data availability

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/74dg25shnt/1.

Appendix A. Estimation of the relative tightness index

Proof of Proposition 3. To derive the beta representation, we apply
the standard approximation similar to the Campbell and Shiller (1988)
decomposition:

log

[ 𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) 𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

]

= 𝜅0 + 𝜅1 log(𝜇𝑡+1) − log(𝜇𝑡),

(A.1)

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385624K. Li and C. Xu

with

𝜅1 =

(1 − 𝜆) exp(log(𝜇))

,

𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆) exp(log(𝜇))

𝜅0 = log(𝜆) − log(1 − 𝜅1) − 𝜅1log(𝜇),

in which log(𝜇)
𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1, and 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1 as the logarithm of 𝑀𝑡+1,
pricing equation can be rewritten as:

is the long-run mean of

log(𝜇𝑡). Denoting 𝑚𝑡+1,
and 𝑅𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1, the

𝜇𝑡+1
𝜇𝑡

]
[
exp(𝑚𝑡+1 + 𝜅0 + 𝜅1𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1 − (1 − 𝜅1) log(𝜇𝑡) + 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1)

𝐸𝑡

= 1 − 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛾𝑡

𝜃𝑗
𝜇𝑡

.

(A.2)

up to a log normal approximation, the pricing equation becomes:

𝐸𝑡

+

[𝑚𝑡+1 + 𝜅0 + 𝜅1𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1 − (1 − 𝜅1) log(𝜇𝑡) + 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1
1
𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1)
2

𝜅2
1 𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1) +

𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝑚𝑡+1) +

1
2

1
2

]

+ 𝜅1𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑚𝑡+1, 𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1) + 𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑚𝑡+1, 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1) + 𝜅1𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1, 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1)

(

= log

1 − 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛾𝑡

)

.

𝜃𝑗
𝜇𝑡

With the assumption that 𝑚𝑡+1 and 𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1 take a linear form in

factors, we have the following equation:

(A.3)

(𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡

)

+

𝐸𝑡

𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1) =

1
2

𝛼𝑗,𝑡 −

𝑚
∑

𝑘=1

𝑏ℎ
𝑘𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑓 ℎ

𝑘,𝑡+1, 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1) − 𝜅1

𝑛
∑

𝑙=1

𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑓 𝑓
𝑏𝑓

𝑙,𝑡+1

, 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1).

(A.4)

Here, 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 is defined as:

(

𝛼𝑗,𝑡 = log

1 − 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛾𝑡

)

𝜃𝑗
𝜇𝑡

− 𝐸𝑡

]
[𝜅0 + 𝜅1𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1 − (1 − 𝜅1) log(𝜇𝑡)

−

1
2

𝜅2
1 𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1) − 𝜅1𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑡(𝑚𝑡+1, 𝛥 log(𝜇)𝑡+1).

Conditioning down, we obtain the following beta representation:

𝐸 (𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡

)

+

1
2

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+1) = 𝛼𝑗 +

𝑚
∑

𝑘=1

𝑖,𝑗,𝑘𝜆ℎ
𝛽ℎ

𝑘 +

𝑛
∑

𝑙=1

𝑖,𝑗,𝑙𝜆𝑓
𝛽𝑓
𝑙 .

(A.6)

(A.5)

In this equation, 𝛽 is the standard notion in a multi-regression setting:
[ 𝜷ℎ
𝑖,𝑗
𝜷𝑓
𝑖,𝑗

𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝐟 ℎ, 𝑟𝑖,𝑗 )
𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝐟 𝑓 , 𝑟𝑖,𝑗 )

𝜎𝐟 ℎ,𝐟 ℎ
𝜎𝐟 𝑓 ,𝐟 ℎ

𝜎𝐟 ℎ,𝐟 𝑓
𝜎𝐟 𝑓 ,𝐟 𝑓

]−1

=

(A.7)

]

[

[

]

⋅

,

in which 𝜷 and 𝐟 are the vectors of betas and factors, and 𝜎𝐟,𝐟 is the
variance covariance matrix of factors. 𝜆ℎ and 𝜆𝑓 are the prices of risks
on factor shocks:
[ 𝜎𝐟 ℎ,𝐟 ℎ
[ 𝝀ℎ
=
𝝀𝑓
𝜎𝐟 𝑓 ,𝐟 ℎ

[ −𝐛ℎ
−𝜅1𝐛𝑓

𝜎𝐟 ℎ,𝐟 𝑓
𝜎𝐟 𝑓 ,𝐟 𝑓

(A.8)

]

]

]

⋅

,

in which 𝝀ℎ and 𝝀𝑓 are the vectors of risk prices, and 𝐛ℎ and 𝐛𝑓 are
the vectors of coefficients on pricing factors in the stochastic discount
factor. □

Appendix B. Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103856.

References

Adrian, T., Moench, E., Shin, H.S., 2010. Macro risk premium and intermediary balance

sheet quantities. IMF Econ. Rev. 58 (1), 179–207.

Adrian, T., Shin, H.S., 2010. Liquidity and leverage. J. Financ. Inter. 19 (3), 418–437.
Ai, H., Li, K., Yang, F., 2020. Financial intermediation and capital reallocation. J.

Financ. Econ. 138 (3), 663–686.

Atkeson, A.G., Eisfeldt, A.L., Weill, P.-O., 2017. Measuring the financial soundness of

US firms, 1926–2012. Research Econ. 71 (3), 613–635.

Bansal, R., Miller, S., Song, D., Yaron, A., 2021. The term structure of equity risk

premia. J. Financ. Econ..

Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risk for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing

puzzles. J. Finance 59 (4), 1481–1509.

Bartolini, L., Hilton, S., Sundaresan, S., Tonetti, C., 2011. Collateral values by asset
class: Evidence from primary securities dealers. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (1), 248–278.
Boguth, O., Carlson, M., Fisher, A.J., Simutin, M., 2012. Leverage and the limits of
arbitrage pricing: Implications for dividend strips and the term structure of equity
risk premia. manuscript, Arizona State University.

Brunnemeier, M., Pedersen, L., 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 22 (6), 2201–2238.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Sannikov, Y., 2014. A macroeconomic model with a financial

sector. Amer. Econ. Rev. 104 (2), 379–421.

Campbell, J., Cochrane, J., 1999. By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation

of aggregate stock market behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 107, 205–251.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future

dividends and discount factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1 (3), 195–228.

Cochrane, J.H., 2017. Macro-finance. Rev. Financ. 21 (3), 945–985.
Cochrane, J.H., Piazzesi, M., 2005. Bond risk premia. Amer. Econ. Rev. 95 (1), 138–160.
Danielsson, J., Shin, H.S., Zigrand, J.-P., 2011. Balance sheet capacity and endogenous

risk. Working paper.

Diamond, W., Van Tassel, P., 2021. Risk-free rates and convenience yields around the

world. Jacobs Levy Equity Manag. Cent. Quant. Financ. Res. Paper.

Du, W., Hébert, B., Huber, A.W., 2023. Are intermediary constraints priced? Rev.

Financ. Stud. 36 (4), 1464–1507.

Epstein, L., Zin, S.E., 1989. Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework. Econometrica 57 (4),
937–969.

Geanakoplos, J., 2012. The leverage cycle. Working paper.
Geanakoplos, J., Fostel, A., 2008. Leverage cycles and the anxious economy. Amer.

Econ. Rev. 98 (4), 1211–1244.

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2010. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
cycle analysis. In: Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3, Elsevier, pp. 547–599.
Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., Prestipino, A., 2020. A macroeconomic model with financial

panics. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87 (1), 240–288.

Giglio, S., Kelly, B.T., Kozak, S., 2023. Equity term structures without dividend strips

data. Available at SSRN.

Gonçalves, A.S., 2021a. Reinvestment risk and the equity term structure. J. Finance.
Gonçalves, A.S., 2021b. The short duration premium. J. Financ. Econ..
Gormsen, N.J., 2021. Time variation of the equity term structure. J. Finance 76 (4),

1959–1999.

Gormsen, N.J., Lazarus, E., 2023. Duration-driven returns. J. Finance 78 (3),

1393–1447.

Haddad, V., Muir, T., 2021. Do intermediaries matter for aggregate asset prices? J.

Finance 76 (6), 2719–2761.

Haddad, V., Sraer, D., 2020. The banking view of bond risk premia. J. Finance 75 (5),

2465–2502.

He, Z., Kelly, B., Manela, A., 2017. Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from

many asset classes. J. Financ. Econ. 126 (1), 1–35.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. Amer. Econ. Rev. 103 (2),

732–770.

He, Z., Nagel, S., Song, Z., 2022. Treasury inconvenience yields during the COVID-19

crisis. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 57–79.

Hu, G.X., Pan, J., Wang, J., 2013. Noise as information for illiquidity. J. Finance 68

(6), 2341–2382.

Jagannathan, R., Liu, B., 2019. Dividend dynamics, learning, and expected stock index

returns. J. Finance 74 (1), 401–448.

Krishnamurthy, A., Li, W., 2023. The demand for money, near-money, and treasury

bonds. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (5), 2091–2130.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The aggregate demand for treasury

debt. J. Polit. Econ. 120 (2), 233–267.

Li, K., Xu, C., 2023. Asset pricing with a financial sector. Financ. Manage. 52 (1),

67–95.

Lucas, R.E., 1978. Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46 (6),

1429–1445.

Maggiori, M., 2017. Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve

currencies. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (10), 3038–3071.

Nagel, S., 2016. The liquidity premium of near-money assets. Q. J. Econ. 131 (4),

1927–1971.

Adrian, T., Boyarchenko, N., 2012. Intermediary leverage cycles and financial stability.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1987. Hypothesis testing with efficient method of moments

New York Fed Working paper.

estimation. Internat. Econom. Rev. 777–787.

Adrian, T., Etula, E., Muir, T., 2014. Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of

Schulz, F., 2016. On the timing and pricing of dividends: Comment. Amer. Econ. Rev.

asset returns. J. Finance 69 (6), 2557–2596.

106 (10), 3185–3223.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385625K. Li and C. Xu

Song, Y., 2016. Dealer funding costs: Implications for the term structure of dividend

Van Binsbergen, J., Hueskes, W., Koijen, R., Vrugt, E., 2013. Equity yields. J. Financ.

risk premia. Available at SSRN.

Econ. 110 (3), 503–519.

Ulrich, M., Florig, S., Seehuber, R., 2023. A model-free term structure of US dividend

Van Binsbergen, J.H., Koijen, R.S., 2017. The term structure of returns: Facts and

premiums. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (3), 1289–1318.

theory. J. Financ. Econ. 124 (1), 1–21.

Van Binsbergen, J., Brandt, M., Koijen, R., 2012. On the timing and pricing of dividends.

Weber, M., 2018. Cash flow duration and the term structure of equity returns. J. Financ.

Amer. Econ. Rev. 102 (4), 1596–1618.

Econ. 128 (3), 486–503.

Van Binsbergen, J.H., Diamond, W.F., Grotteria, M., 2021. Risk-free interest rates. J.

Financ. Econ..

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385626