Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Real effects of supplying safe private money
Chenzi Xu a,b,c,∗, He Yang d,1
a Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, USA
b National Bureau of Economics Research (NBER), USA
c Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), UK
d Amazon, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Real Effects of Supplying Safe Priv
ate Money (Original data)

JEL classification:
E42
E51
N11
N21

Keywords:
Private money
Bank notes
Market access
Safe assets
Payments
Currency

1. Introduction

Privately issued money often bears default risk, which creates transaction frictions when used as a medium
of exchange. The late 19th century US provides a unique context to evaluate the real effects of supplying a new
type of money that is safe from default. We measure the local change in ‘‘monetary’’ transaction frictions with a
market access approach derived from general equilibrium trade theory. Consistent with theories hypothesizing
that lowering transaction frictions benefits the traded and inputs-intensive sectors, we find an increase in
traded goods production, in the share of manufacturing output and employment, and in innovation.

While private money can provide payment services in certain mar-
kets and generate significant seigniorage profits for issuers and early
adopters, information frictions make it costly to verify their default
risks. These default risks can lead to large ‘‘monetary’’ transaction costs,
which can be particularly high at longer distances as it becomes more
costly to acquire information. In contrast, fully backed safe monies have
no default risk and therefore have a ‘‘no questions asked’’ quality that
makes these debt instruments a frictionless medium of exchange (Holm-
ström, 2015), which can foster economic growth by easing transaction
costs.

Empirical evidence on the extent to which unsafe private monies
hinder econonomic transactions and weigh on economic growth is
scarce. This paper provides a novel analysis of the real benefits of
reducing monetary transaction frictions in the economy. We study
how supplying a new form of safe money changed the geography of
monetary transaction frictions in the US from 1870 to 1880, and we
show that it had a positive impact on the evolution of trade intensity
and local economic development from 1880 to 1890.

This historical context is particularly suitable for our question be-
cause the US was a large and developed economy, but unlike other early

A predominance of private monies may introduce consumer protection
and financial stability risks because of their potential volatility and the
risk of run-like behavior. Indeed, the period in the nineteenth century
when there was active competition among issuers of private paper ban-
knotes in the United States is now notorious for inefficiency, fraud, and
instability in the payments system.

–Lael Brainard, Member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors
(2021)

All forms of money are a liability of the issuer, and their usefulness
as mediums of exchange depends on the confidence users have in the
value of the assets backing the liability and/or the willingness of others
to accept the liability as payment. Privately created monies often vary
in their safety and can be prone to large devaluations when users
receive better information about, or lose confidence in, the value of
the underlying assets.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: chenzixu@stanford.edu (C. Xu).
1 Work done outside of employment at Amazon.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103868
Received 25 March 2022; Received in revised form 6 May 2024; Accepted 8 May 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103868Availableonline21May20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.C. Xu and H. Yang

industrial nations such as the UK, France, and Germany, it operated
under a fragmented monetary system without a central bank responsi-
ble for maintaining a common, uniform currency. In this setting, the
money supply consisted of notes issued by thousands of individual
local private banks, backed by bank asset portfolios with little or even
no regulatory oversight, and with low recovery rates following bank
failures (Calomiris and Gorton, 1991). Private bank notes were not
legal tender and they were only redeemable into specie at the issuing
location. As a result, they bore both redemption risks (the possibility of
not receiving the full face value of a note in legal tender or specie) and
redemption costs (the costs of transporting a note to its issuer), which
together manifested in the way notes traded at a discount from their
face values across town borders and at higher distances (Gorton, 1999;
Ales et al., 2008). Both contemporaries and historians have remarked
on the frictions created by this fragmented monetary system, which
lacked a sufficient supply of safe monies to sustain the transactional
needs of the economy (e.g., Knox, 1900; Cagan, 1963).

The National Banking Act of 1864 introduced a new type of feder-
ally regulated ‘‘national bank’’ whose notes differed from existing ‘‘state
bank’’ notes in two key ways. First, these notes were fully backed by
federal government debt, which severed the link between a bank’s id-
iosyncratic portfolio credit risk and the real value of its notes.2 Second,
national bank notes were regulatorily required to be accepted at par
by all other national banks around the country. Transactions inside the
network could therefore always occur within a common national bank
currency at zero discount, even if the issuing banks differed. Outside
the network, even transactions conducted in national bank notes faced
redemption costs. These differences made using national bank notes
especially advantageous for long-distance transactions. While there
were alternative payment mediums, such as specie and checks issued
from bank deposit accounts, the former was costly to ship and insure,
and the latter were even more informationally-sensitive because they
depended on the credit-worthiness of individuals and thus were also
more frictional at longer distances.

While the Act itself passed at the federal level, there was significant
geographic variation in where national banks were created and hence
in the overall network configuration of safe note supply and circulation.
A change in the geographic distribution of national banks altered the
monetary frictions facing a local economy and could reduce transaction
costs via two main channels. First, it eliminated bilateral monetary
transaction costs between any two locations in the country that both
had national banks.3 Second, for locations that remained outside the
network, it potentially altered the lowest-cost route to a national bank
that supplied and redeemed safe notes, which changed the depen-
dence on alternatives. In conjunction, being closer to the national
bank network lowered all monetary transaction costs for a location,
but particularly so for long-distance transactions that would otherwise
be more exposed to the frictions that made alternative transaction
mediums costly to use.

In order to proceed with our empirical analysis, we embed monetary
transaction costs into a model of multiregional trade that produces a
measure of a local economy’s trade potential, which we call ‘‘monetary’’
market access (MMA). This measure captures, in reduced form, the
overall change in a location’s trade potential as a function of all of the
changes in trade frictions and market sizes that it faces in the entire

2 It did so by mandating that all national bank notes had to be backed
110% in the market value of federal government bonds, and it established
structured procedures for insolvency and receivership that were designed to
prioritize note holders against any losses, which eliminated default risk on
notes.

3 National banks were also more efficient at providing other forms of
payment services that operated through the network because the Act included
other regulatory changes such as a pyramidal structure in reserve deposits and
a formalized clearing system, which strengthened their interbank connections
and benefited check clearing among national banks relative to state banks.

network. For any given location, there are two sources of changes in its
MMA: the first is direct changes in its own access (because a national
bank enters the town), and the second is changes elsewhere in the
network.

In order to provide causal evidence on the impact of changing
monetary transaction costs, we employ two primary approaches. Our
first approach instruments for the component of the change in MMA
that comes from a location gaining its own national bank and joining
the network for the first time. The instrument uses plausibly exogenous
variation in the likelihood that a national bank is established locally,
coming from regulatory capital requirements that were based on town
population cut-offs. Banks established in towns with population below
6,000 needed to raise $50,000 of equity capital while banks in towns
with population above 6,000 (and fewer than 50,000) were required
to raise twice as much. The discontinuous jump in the implied equity
capital per capita meant that towns just below the population cut-off
faced significantly lower entry costs for establishing a national bank.
These town population requirements were binding since banks were
not allowed to branch, the capital had to be raised upfront, and there
were strict residency requirements for bank directors.4 These features
of the regulatory environment create a plausibly exogenous entry cost
for new national banks in towns near the population cut-off and hence
for direct access to a supplier and redeemer of the safe currency in a
location.

Our second approach measures the change in MMA in a location
based solely on changes elsewhere in the network. By construction, this
approach generates variation in MMA that is exogenous to changes in
the location itself, including for instance the change in credit supply
after the creation of a national bank. We construct this measure by
holding fixed the national bank network at the beginning of the sample
period for the focal location, and we only allow MMA to change from
indirect exposure to changes in the rest of the network. This strategy
allows us to remove all unobserved local shocks that might affect the
outcomes of interest such as changes to local productivity or credit. We
provide several measures at varying distances from a focal location,
including within the county, and within radiuses of 25, 50, and 100
miles.

Together, these two approaches provide complementary evidence
on the causal impact of changing monetary frictions. In order to main-
tain comparability between our two sets of empirical approaches, our
analysis focuses on the sample of towns where we can identify the
effect of gaining a national bank for the first time. First, we filter on
towns that have population below 6,000 in 1870 (the first decadal
census after the passage of the Act) so that they all face the same
low capital requirement initially. Second, we impose that they do not
have a national bank as of 1875 and therefore had no prior direct
access to a local supply of safe bank notes.5 Third, we require that
their populations were between 4,000 and 8,000 in 1880. Choosing
a small population bandwidth of 4,000 to 8,000 in the subsequent
decade allows us to limit our sample to towns that are likely to be
similar in both observable and unobservable characteristics in 1870. We
show that pre-period observable characteristics were not significantly
different between the towns with population above 6,000 versus those
below 6,000 population in 1880, both conditionally and uncondition-
ally. Within this set of towns, some crossed the 6,000 population cutoff
in the 1880 census, which doubled the entry cost for a national bank.
We use crossing this threshold as an exogenous shifter for direct access
to safe private money.

4 The non-branching rule meant banks could not be created in a low-
capital environment while locating its business in more populous environments
elsewhere. The upfront capital and residency requirement made it difficult to
simply raise the required equity outside of a town’s borders or at a later date.
5 The analysis is not sensitive to choosing 1875 as the first year in the 1870s

that a town has a national bank.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038682C. Xu and H. Yang

For this first approach, we assess the first stage effect of crossing
the population threshold on the change in MMA from 1870 to 1880
in a two-period difference-in-differences estimation. To strengthen the
empirical strategy, we control for a town’s growth trajectory with the
population change from 1870 to 1880. This control variable absorbs
differences across towns in 1870 that impact their population change.
We also control for a town’s financial development and physical trade
costs in the pre-period for the same reason. The identifying assumption
is that conditional on controls, there were no concurrent shocks to
places just below the population cut-off that would have caused their
outcomes to be systematically different after 1880. We find a strong
first stage: being below the population cut-off in 1880 is associated with
a 62% increase in monetary market access (𝐹 -stat of 9.6) by the middle
of the decade relative to the previous decade.6

Our analysis of real variables is guided by the intuition, formalized
by trade theory, that reducing the trade costs associated with moving a
good from the producer to consumer will lower the good’s final price,
which will raise its competitiveness in the consumer’s market, thereby
leading to increased production at its origin. Since monetary transac-
tion frictions outside the national bank network are linked to frictions
that increase with distance, reducing these frictions is analogous to
reducing cross-border trade costs. We have three main sets of results.
First, we show that monetary transaction frictions have a mean-
ingful impact on the real economy as reducing these frictions leads to
large and statistically significant growth in the production of tradable
goods overall, measured by agricultural and manufacturing goods per
capita. We find that a one standard deviation increase in MMA raises
tradable production by 15.1% and 6.2%, using the instrumented change
in joining the network and the rest-of-network changes, respectively.
These results are robust to a number of alternative specifications in-
cluding different configurations of control variables and construction
of standard errors.

We next assess heterogeneity across goods by focusing on the agri-
cultural sector, where we are able to observe the composition of goods
produced. While all agricultural goods can be traded, only some are
part of a national commodities market. By definition, the final price of
such commodities depends more on the national market, and therefore
reductions in local trade frictions pass more fully on to producers in the
form of higher profits, which incentivize agricultural producers to tilt
their production toward these goods. We find a 2.3% increase in the
share of production of commodity goods for a one standard deviation
increase in MMA.

Second, we find that the growth in the traded sector is driven by
growth in the manufacturing sector, and that the economy becomes
more manufacturing-intensive overall. This heterogeneity is consistent
with theories pointing to structural transformation arising from rela-
tive changes in final output prices leading to sectoral reallocation of
factors (e.g., Herrendorf et al., 2014). The share of manufacturing in
overall production and employment both grow by 8.4% relative to their
pre-shock means from a one standard deviation change in MMA.

We also find that the growth in manufacturing is driven by growth
in inputs usage. Reducing frictions for sourcing inputs can increase the
quantity of inputs and allow firms to source them more broadly and
therefore also improve the match quality of the inputs they use. This
‘‘input sourcing’’ channel can raise output without requiring credit ex-
pansion as importing better inputs makes firms more productive (Gold-
berg et al., 2010). We find that the growth in employment combined
with an increase in inputs appear to drive the output effects.

While we are not able to fully rule out the possibility that these
effects are affected by the standard bank credit channel in trade (e.g.,
Paravisini et al., 2015; Xu, 2022), our second approach excludes vari-
ation from the endogenous (location’s own national bank) component

and its correlated effects, including the impact of national bank entry
on the local credit supply. In addition, we can control for the volume
of lending from national banks as a proxy for this channel in all of
our specifications and show that it does not significantly change the
estimated coefficients.

In our third set of results, we assess the link between monetary
market access and long-run innovation and output. Schmookler (1954)
posits that the changes in patenting activity in the US in the seven
decades following the Civil War may have been due to expansions
in the markets firms could reach (i.e., their market access) such that
it was more profitable for firms to invest in productivity-enhancing
technologies. We assess this hypothesis with the number of patents
granted, and we find that a one standard deviation increase in the
change in MMA leads to 1.3 times more the cumulative amount of
innovation measured relative to before the Civil War. The growth
in innovation is also consistent with our findings that manufacturing
output remained elevated until at least 1900.7

Our paper primarily relates to the theoretical and empirical work
on the optimal design and regulation of digital private monies, much
of which has drawn comparisons between stablecoin design and tra-
ditional banking (Eichengreen, 2019; Catalini and de Gortari, 2021;
Catalini and Shah, 2021; Gorton and Zhang, 2021; Gorton et al.,
2022b). These papers highlight various mechanisms by which pegged
private digital currencies (stablecoins) can achieve their eponymous
stability, most of which involve maintaining sufficient safe reserves
like US Treasuries as the backing asset, as in this historical context. To
the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to provide empirical
evidence that improving the safety of privately issued money, in this
case by regulating the quantity and quality of the assets backing the
monetary liability, positively affects real economic activity.

More generally, our analysis is related to the literature in which
assets that are sufficiently safe may provide monetary services by acting
as a medium of exchange, as in Coppola et al. (2023). There is a
separate literature that microfounds the phenomenon of fiat money
circulating as the medium of exchange as in Kiyotaki and Wright
(1989), and work showing that safe monetary assets can also transition
into being a fiat money as in Bolt et al. (2023). In our context, the
redeemability of a private bank note for a guaranteed amount is its
defining feature, both theoretically and empirically.

Private bank notes are only one form of short-term bank debt, and
while the large literature on bank debt illiquidity has mostly focused
on their fire-sale externalities and their role in increasing financial
fragility (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983; Stein, 2012; Admati and Hellwig,
2014), this paper studies a context in which a change in the regulatory
environment ensures that they are truly safe with full liquidity cover-
age, which creates a Gorton and Pennacchi (1990)-type transactions
medium. The national bank notes that are fully backed by government
debt in our context take the form of the optimal contract that removes
any discount from the debt’s face value, thereby making transactions
efficient (Dang et al., 2017). Hence, we provide evidence for a sub-
national monetary channel in the tradition of Friedman and Schwartz
(1965) and Romer and Romer (1989).

While the literature on the bank credit channel has demonstrated
the importance of credit supply for international trade in both modern
and historical contexts (e.g., Amiti and Weinstein, 2011; Paravisini
et al., 2015, 2023; Xu, 2022; Matray et al., 2023), our paper relates to
work documenting that the presence of local banks impacts growth and
labor market outcomes in modern developing countries (e.g., Fonseca
and Matray, 2024; Ji et al., 2023). We focus, like Sarkisyan (2023), on
the benefits of accessing a safe medium of exchange.

6 Our instrument also predicts a 52% increase in the direct likelihood of

gaining a national bank locally.

7 The county-level data on manufacturing do not exist for 1910, and the
levels are no longer significantly different by 1920. Given the large amount of
changes that likely occurred in WWI and after the establishment of the Federal
Reserve system, we end our analysis at 1900.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038683C. Xu and H. Yang

More generally, this paper adds to the literature on the historical
determinants of economic growth in the United States and contributes
to the better understanding of how the banking sector has shaped the
geography of economic activity in the late 19th century (Friedman
and Schwartz, 1965; Rousseau and Wachtel, 1998; Rousseau and Sylla,
2005; Landon-Lane and Rockoff, 2007). Our results are consistent
with Sylla (1969, 1982), which argue that the National Banking Act’s
high regulatory capital requirements held back economic development
by failing to expand the bank note supply sufficiently, and Cagan
(1963) that attributes economic growth in the late 19th century to
currency stability. Fulford (2015) uses a non-parametric approach to
estimate the average impact of adding a marginal national bank to
counties over three decades in this period and similarly finds large
positive effects on total production per capita. This paper hypothesizes
that monetary transaction frictions are a channel for those effects,
and it follows Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) in conceptualizing and
estimating the cost of those frictions through a reduced form market
access approach. Our focus on the change in the monetary system
shows the empirical relevance of those frictions to the real traded
sector.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses
the institutional details of the historical banking sector and monetary
system. Section 3 describes the data, and Section 4 presents the em-
pirical framework with monetary market access. Section 5 explains
the sample construction, measurement, and empirical strategies. Sec-
tion 6 presents the empirical the effect of national bank entry on real
economic outcomes, and Section 7 concludes.

2. Historical context of frictions in private money

Until the establishment of the Federal Reserve system in 1913, the
United States had a fragmented monetary system with thousands of
different circulating mediums of exchange. One of the predominant
types was paper notes printed by individual private banks. These bank
notes were liabilities issued against the bank’s assets, which could be
redeemed at the issuing bank for specie (when the US was on a metallic
standard) or for legal tender. Private bank notes were not themselves
legal tender and could therefore be refused for payment completely or
could be accepted only at a discount from face value. The guaranteed
consumption value of a note therefore depended on the amount of
specie or legal tender the note’s owner could receive for it.

The discount on the face value of a private bank note priced
two main frictions: the first was uncertainty about the value of the
underlying assets backing the note—i.e., its redemption value once it
was presented at the issuing bank (‘‘redemption risks’’), and the second
was the transportation or time costs of returning the note to its issuer
for redemption in the first place (‘‘redemption costs’’).

2.1. Unsafe bank notes during the Free Banking Era

During the first half of the 19th century, in the period known as the
Free Banking Era, there was only one type of private bank note—the
‘‘state bank’’ note—for which both redemption risks and redemption
costs were high. These frictions primarily arose from the structure of
the banking system in which all regulatory oversight was delegated to
individual states, and states often allowed banks to operate with few or
no restrictions.

Redemption risks and costs. The lack of regulatory oversight led to a
risky banking sector that was prone to failures and panics for three
reasons. First, there were few limitations on asset composition and
low minimum capital requirements, so banks often had highly levered,
risky portfolios with little equity buffer. Second, banks were prevented
from branching so they had concentrated geographic exposure, and
local shocks easily led to bank failures (Bordo, 1998). Third, there
was neither a formal system of interbank lending nor a lender of last

resort (White, 1982). In combination, bank runs and failures were
frequent.8 The bank notes issued by failed banks could not be redeemed
and were valueless.9

Even when the bank itself was solvent, its notes could be risky
and could have uncertain redemption value for several reasons. First,
each bank designed its own notes, so there were thousands of types of
notes of different sizes, styles, and nominal values in circulation, which
made it difficult to distinguish genuine notes from counterfeits. Second,
conditional on a note being genuine, the lack of regulatory oversight
allowed banks to issue notes beyond their redemption capabilities.
Therefore, even if the underlying assets were safe and retained their full
value, notes might only be partially collateralized.10 Third, in practice,
notes tended to be backed by assets such as the bank’s loan portfolio,
state government bonds, and equities, all of whose values fluctuated.
Significant drops in the collateral led to note redemption runs during
which the notes were heavily discounted (Rolnick and Weber, 1982).11
Finally, in addition to a note’s fundamental redemption risk, there
was a cost to returning it back to its point of origin where it could
be redeemed, deposited, or traded for consumption. On average, these
costs increased with distance (Gorton, 1999).

Bank note discounts. Redemption risks associated with counterfeit and
default, and redemption costs associated with returning a note to its
issuing bank were priced as a discount on the face value of a note.
In practice, assessing a bank note’s underlying risk was costly and
information-intensive so transactions in a local economy only occurred
in local bank notes (Appleton, 1831). Specialized note brokers in-
termediated the currency market where they charged a commission
for their expertise and priced the discount on a note based on its
underlying qualities. Publications such as the ‘‘Bank Note Reporters and
Counterfeit Detectors’’ helped brokers to ascertain the authenticity of
unfamiliar notes.12 Newspapers published the average discount rates,
which varied by bank and over time (Gorton, 1999; Gorton et al.,
2022b).

Appendix Figure A.1 plots average discounts of state bank notes in
several states relative to banks in Philadelphia. The volatility in the dis-
counts in part reflects significant underlying time-varying idiosyncratic
redemption risks.13 Rockoff (1975) estimates that losses on notes due
to bank failures ranged from 7% in Indiana to 63% in Minnesota. They
also reflect the variation in redemption costs: while the states in the
northeast closer to Philadelphia (Figure A.1a) had discounts up to 10%,
the ones more distant from Philadelphia (Figure A.1b) had discounts as
high as 80%.

8 Between 1875 and 1890, 2.5% of state banks failed.
9 John Jay Knox, the Comptroller of the Currency from 1872 to 1884
wrote, ‘‘The cost of exchange was also immensely increased by the lack of
uniformity in the credit of the banks in the several states at the commercial
centers’’, (Knox, 1900, p. 315).

10 Milton Friedman referred to the phenomenon of banks over-inflating their
currency to the point of not being able to meet redemption as ‘‘wildcat
banking’’, a term that is now frequently applied to the antebellum period in
American banking.

11 ‘‘It is possible that the loss to note holders was about five percent per
annum...the runs on the banks were not made by the depositors, but by note
holders’’, (Knox, 1900, p. 315).

12 Figure A.2a displays an example of a private bank note from Mas-
sachusetts with face value $20 where the name and location of the issuing
bank is prominently displayed. Figure A.2b shows the written description for
the same bank’s notes in a printed ‘‘counterfeit detector’’, where the $20 bill
is described in the bottom left corner.

13 For example, Illinois banks committed over 5 million dollars between
1836 and 1842 to building a canal that would connect the Illinois River and
Lake Michigan. However, this investment completely drained state funds and
caused a wave of state bank failures in Illinois. As a result, the relative discount
of Illinois state bank notes averaged at around 70% in 1842, compared to
about 15% in the previous year.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038684C. Xu and H. Yang

Despite these costs, bank notes survived and were widely used
because there were few alternatives. There was little circulating specie
in the payments system, and moreover payment in specie was expen-
sive because of physical transportation and insurance costs.14 Coins,
primarily Spanish and US silver dollars, were scarce, in an array of
unwieldy denominations, and were subject to debasement and deterio-
ration (Greenfield and Rockoff, 1995; Ware, 1990). Greenbacks were a
federally-issued fiat currency that traded at a discount for much of this
period and also in limited supply.15

Demand for reducing bank note transaction costs. The limited supply of
safe assets that could act as a frictionless medium of exchange created
large transaction costs in exchange and trade, and these costs drew
the attention of lawmakers and policymakers.16 In 1863, Senator John
Sherman from Ohio argued in Congress for the passage of the National
Banking Act explicitly in terms of improving bank notes as a medium
of exchange:

This currency will be uniform. It will be printed by the United
States. It will be of uniform size, shape, and form; so that a bank bill
issued in the State of Maine will be current in California; a bank bill
issued in Ohio will be current wherever our Government currency
goes at all; and a bank bill issued in the State of Connecticut will
be freely taken in Iowa or anywhere else. There is no limit to its
convertibility. It will be of uniform value throughout the United
States. I have no doubt these United States notes will, in the end,
be taken as the Bank of England note now is all over the world,
as a medium, and a standard medium of exchange [...] They will
be safe; they will be uniform; they will be convertible. Those are
all the requisites that are necessary for any system of currency or
exchange.17

The transactional costs of using state bank notes, together with the
need to raise funds for the federal government during the Civil War,
eventually led to the passage of the National Banking Act.

2.2. National banking era introduction of safe bank notes

The National Banking Act aimed to stabilize the banking system
and to create a network of national banks that were subject to federal
regulations. While state bank notes had redemption risks associated
with counterfeit and default and redemption costs associated with
returning a note to its issuing bank, national bank notes eliminated or
significantly reduced both types of frictions.

14 Corroborating evidence on the lack of gold in circulation comes from the
national ‘‘gold’’ banks that could issue notes redeemable in gold. All of these,
except for a few in California, failed because they could not obtain the gold
necessary to back their notes (Greenfield and Rockoff, 1990). While the US
Mint produced more uniform coins, these were primarily used in international
trade rather than domestically (Carothers, 1930).

15 Greenbacks were issued by the federal government in 1862 after suspend-
ing specie redemption for bank notes in 1861. In a demonstration of Gresham’s
Law, greenbacks immediately pushed specie out of circulation, and gold did
not return to circulation in the United States outside of California (Mitchell,
1903; Greenfield and Rockoff, 1995). Only after the US retired a large fraction
of greenbacks and returned to the gold standard in 1878 did greenbacks
trade at par with their face value. However, there was a nominal cap on
their circulation that was not adjusted for inflation or growth so greenbacks
represented a diminishing share of the overall money supply each year.

16 See Appendix B for contemporary examples of how the uncertain value

of state bank notes led to legal disputes and inconvenience in exchange.

17 Senate floor, February 10, 1863; http://www.yamaguchy.com/library/

spaulding/sherman63.html.

No redemption risk. National banks were regulated by the newly cre-
ated Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and their notes
were designed to be standardized, uniform, and safe. Therefore, al-
though they continued to be privately issued by individual national
banks, they bore no idiosyncratic redemption risk.

First, notes were overcollateralized by US Treasury bonds where
banks were only allowed to issue 90% of the market value of gov-
ernment bonds on their balance sheets, and losses in the collateral’s
market value had to be supplemented with additional bonds.18 This
overcollateralization strictly constrained the note issuance.19 However,
backing the currency in this way eliminated transaction frictions arising
from asymmetric information about a bank’s solvency (Dang et al.,
2017).

Second, in the case of a national bank failure, the OCC oversaw
the liquidation process that prioritized note holders from losses, and
its success was documented in the annual reports of the OCC, which
reported that there were no losses from bank note defaults in this
period. Third, bank note redemption was a condition of operation, and
national banks that refused to redeem their notes were immediately put
into receivership.

In addition to structuring national bank notes in a way that guar-
anteed them to have full recovery rates in the case of a bank failure,
the banks were also much less likely to fail in the first place. Both
equity capital and the banks’ asset portfolios faced stricter regulations
that were designed to prevent runs and to improve financial stability.
Capital requirements were also much tighter: they were higher; 50%
had to be raised before business commenced and the rest completed
within five months; and they could only be met in cities with sufficient
local capital since a national bank had to have at least 5 directors, and
at least 75% of them must have resided locally.

To reduce risk-taking, national banks also faced limits on the long-
term loans they could make, were not allowed to take land as collateral,
and were subject to detailed annual supervision. These restrictions
limited the provision of long-term credit and credit to the agricultural
sector where collateral most often took the form of farmland (Knox,
1900). The average national bank failure rate was approximately 0.25%
in this period, which was 10% of the state bank failure rate.

Lower redemption costs. The second key component of the legislation
was that all national banks were required to accept the notes of all other
national banks at par.20 National bank notes could also immediately be
redeemed for specie or legal tender at the US Treasury in addition to
at the issuing bank. In combination with the notes’ full backing, this
second requirement meant that within the national bank network, the
real value of a national bank note was guaranteed for both consumption
and savings. They could therefore circulate as a medium of exchange
or be deposited as savings without a discount on their face value.

18 This form of narrow banking was designed in part to create a demand for
US Treasury debt that also helped to finance the federal government (Gorton
et al., 2022a). Until 1882, there was an additional constraint that limited banks
from issuing notes beyond the value of 70%–90% of their equity capital (the
limit was higher at lower levels of capital), regardless of the value of bonds
the banks held as assets. The full text of the original legislation related to each
of these legislations is in Appendix B.

19 Indeed, there is well-documented evidence by both contemporaries and
historians that there was an overall shortage of national bank notes in the
decades after the Act was passed (e.g., Bell, 1912; Friedman and Schwartz,
1965; Gorton et al., 2022a), in part because of the low supplies of government
debt. In the 1890s, this shortage was so severe that the personal liabilities
of firms and individuals were circulated as a medium of exchange (Warner,
1895).

20 Although national banks were not required to redeem other banks’ notes
in specie or legal tender, in practice it was straightforward to deposit another
bank’s notes, withdraw the bank’s own notes, and redeem those.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038685C. Xu and H. Yang

While this part of the national bank legislation eliminated redemp-
tion costs within the network, it did not do so outside of it. State
banks had no obligation to accept national bank notes at par, and
indeed all banks had strong incentives not to do so. National bank
notes were a less useful asset than legal tender or specie for banks
because they could not be used to raise bank capital, pay certain taxes,
or buy government bonds, and they did not count toward bank reserve
requirements. State banks could embed a preference for legal tender
by, for example, extending loans in national bank notes but requiring
that the loan be repaid in legal tender.21

Other bank liabilities as payments.
In addition to notes, both state
and national banks provided check clearing services as a transactions
medium. However, checks were sensitive to individual depositors’ id-
iosyncratic risks and therefore even more information-sensitive. As in
the case of notes, banks were only obligated to redeem checks at par
when they were presented at the original bank’s office.22

The National Banking Act also created a pyramidal system of re-
serves and a centralized clearing house for national banks that aimed
to reduce counterparty risk within the system. As a result, checking ac-
counts exhibited the same asymmetry in monetary transaction frictions
as bank notes.

2.3. Geography of monetary transaction frictions

The geographic distribution of private bank note circulation is gov-
erned by fundamental restrictions and by the monetary benefits they
provide. In terms of fundamental restrictions, all private bank notes
could only be created by their issuer. However, national bank notes
were redeemable by any other national bank while state bank notes
were only redeemable by the original issuing bank.

In terms of their monetary benefits, national and state bank notes
differed in their usefulness as both mediums of exchange and as savings
vehicles. By regulation, national bank notes were a frictionless medium
of exchange within the national bank network because both sellers
and buyers could use the par value of the notes for consumption and
savings. In contrast, state bank notes were only frictionless within their
local economy because they faced redemption risks and costs at a
distance.23 As savings vehicles, national bank notes could be deposited
at par in the network, but were disadvantaged outside the network.

These forces imply that national bank notes were most valuable
inside the national bank network while state bank notes were most
valuable within their local economy. Both types of notes would nat-
urally tend to circulate where they were most valued. In conjunction
with the well-documented evidence by both contemporaries and his-
tories that there was an overall shortage of national bank notes, these
forces imply that being closer to the national bank network improved
access to its superior form of money.

2.4. Period of study

We study the impact of the introduction of national bank notes
into local economies in the 1880s relative to the 1870s, and we ex-
amine outcomes in the 1890s relative to the 1880s. We focus on these
decades for two reasons. First, the US monetary system underwent
many adjustments in the decade after the Civil War, including the
demonetization of silver in 1873 and a significant amendment to the
National Banking Act in 1874. We therefore focus on changes in the
national bank network beginning in 1875.

Second, our interest is on the impact of introducing a superior
medium of exchange before it became the dominant currency. At
the very beginning of this period, there were large changes in the
banking sector overall (appendix Figure A.3 shows the evolution of the
number and total assets of national banks and state banks from 1863 to
1900), but the decades from 1870 to 1890 feature a relatively steady
proportion of state and national banks without large changes in their
relative composition (Jaremski, 2014).

3. Data

We combine several newly collected and digitized historical

datasets. Table 1 reports summary statistics in the 1870s.

Town populations: We manually collect town and city populations
from the original reports of the 10th and 11th Decennial Censuses
of Population that report information covering the decades 1860 to
1880 (Figure A.4a). These original PDFs allow us to locate towns with
population below 2500 people, which are not in the digitized censuses.
Bank characteristics: We collect and digitize the balance sheets for
all national banks from 1870 to 1890 from the Annual Report of the
Comptroller of the Currency (Figure A.4b). These balance sheets report
locations as well as the main asset and liabilities components such as
their loans and bank note circulation. We collect the locations of non-
national banks (state and private bankers) from The Banker’s Almanac
and Register of 1876 and 1885 (Figure A.4c).

Physical trade costs: We measure counties’ physical trade costs
with railroad access in 1875 and 1880 (Atack, 2016) and transportation
market access in 1870 and 1880 (Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016;
Hornbeck and Rotemberg, 2021). The latter measure is constructed tak-
ing into account the entire transportation network including railroads,
wagon roads, and waterways.

County outcomes: Our outcomes are from the Censuses of Agricul-
ture and Manufacturing from 1870 to 1900. These Censuses provide
us with population measures, inputs usage, capital, and production
for both sectors in each county. For manufacturing, we are also able
to observe employment, and in agriculture, we observe disaggregated
production by crops. These censuses also report county-level popu-
lations by gender and age group. We use the adjusted populations
from Hornbeck (2010) and Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2021) that align
with county borders defined in 1870.

4. Empirical framework

21 This arrangement was common, and it passed the redemption costs on to

the depositor.

22 Checks could only be cleared when both the status of the bank and of the
personal account could be verified. In addition, banks lost reserves as soon as
a check cleared, whereas notes could be used to settle transactions without
immediate demand for reserve (Briones and Rockoff, 2005). Empirically, they
only became common in long-distance wholesale trade at the turn of the
twentieth century (Kinley, 1910; Preston, 1920; James and Weiman, 2010).

23 The Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency in 1877 described
the following way: ‘‘The notes which were returned from the commercial
centers for redemption were readily paid out and circulated at home, and the
demand for specie, wherever it existed, was almost entirely owing either to an
excess of currency or to a want of confidence in the institutions which issued
it’’.

In this historical setting where each bank note was a debt claim
to specie or legal tender, monetary transaction frictions arose from
transacting in unsafe debt that has redemption risk and costs. The
theoretical framework that ties the supply of national bank notes to
transaction frictions is developed in Coppola et al. (2023), which shows
that increasing the safe supply of an asset increases its usefulness as
a medium of exchange by increasing the probability that a two-sided
transaction can occur in that common medium.

Empirically, the monetary transaction friction is the discount paid
for using a particular medium of exchange in a bilateral transaction.
It therefore acts as a standard trade cost. Consider the example of
purchasing goods from New York in Philadelphia. In the case where
the transaction is conducted in Philadelphia bank notes, the seller in

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038686C. Xu and H. Yang

Table 1
Summary statistics.

Population 1870
Population 1880
Railroads
MMA (log)
tMA (log)
State banks
Tradables production
Commodities share
Manu. production
Manu. inputs
Manu. production share
Manu. employment share

Mean

3968.62
5059.28
4.35
10.54
15.83
0.65
893.18
0.89
662.73
399.47
0.67
0.33

Med.

4096.00
4866.00
4.00
11.04
16.00
0.00
808.28
0.89
492.02
289.39
0.71
0.26

St. Dev.

1098.78
927.76
2.69
2.00
0.49
0.96
453.28
0.09
500.87
325.56
0.24
0.23

N

147
147
147
147
147
147
147
147
147
147
147
147

Notes: Table 1 reports the mean, median, and standard deviation of each location
characteristics in the pre-entry period. The populations in 1870 and 1880 are at the
town level, which is the relevant population for our instrument. The other measures are
taken at the county level. The measure of railroads is from Atack (2016) and measured
in 1876. State and other non-national bank financial institutions are obtained from the
Banker’s Almanac and Register of 1876, and the locations of national banks are from the
Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency in 1874. We calculate monetary and
transport market access using bilateral transport costs and monetary costs in 1870 and
1875, respectively. Manufacturing and agricultural production are from their respective
censuses of 1870.

New York would incorporate the costs of converting the ‘‘foreign’’ note
into local currency (the discount) in the final price, and the monetary
transaction cost acts as a non-revenue generating tax on the final price
of the good.24

In contrast, if the transaction occurs in a common currency that
both the buyer and seller face no frictions in accessing to use for
consumption or savings (i.e., they both belong to the national bank
network), then there are no monetary transaction costs, and the final
price of the good in Philadelphia is lower relative to a transaction
conducted in a frictional medium. Following the introduction of the
national bank network, transactions—particularly at long distances—
experience a large decline in frictions. In aggregate, each location
benefits from the total reduction of costs coming from all other possible
locations it can transact with.

As in a general class of trade models (e.g., Eaton and Kortum,
2002), reducing the final price of a good in a destination makes it more
competitive and raises its consumption. The change in demand then
induces more production until firms reach a new optimal equilibrium
at a higher level of production.

4.1. Market access with monetary transaction frictions

We quantify the monetary frictions that each location faces by
adapting a model of multiregional trade with trade costs where we aug-
ment the standard measures of bilateral trade costs so that it combines
physical trade costs, which we denote by 𝜙, with monetary transaction
frictions 𝜇. Locations are denoted by 𝑜 and 𝑑 depending on whether
they are the origin or destination of a good. Bilateral trade costs are
defined in an ‘‘iceberg’’ way such that the final price of a good 𝑗 that is
traded from 𝑜 to 𝑑 has the following price: 𝑝𝑜𝑑 (𝑗) = 𝜏𝑜𝑑 𝑝𝑜𝑜(𝑗) where 𝑝𝑜𝑜
refers to a non-traded good that is produced and consumed locally and
≥ 1 incorporates all bilateral trade costs.25 Consumers have a CES
𝜏𝑜𝑑
utility function with elasticity of substitution 𝜎. In combination with
firm production, this set-up delivers a standard gravity equation for the

24 For simplicity, in this example, the supplier pays for the conversion,
although the incidence of the discount may be split in other ways with the
buyer.

25 Iceberg trade costs assume that a fraction 𝜏 − 1 of goods goes towards the
delivery cost. In order to receive one unit of a good, 𝜏 units must be shipped.
They thus act as a non-revenue generating tax, and in our framework, it does
not matter which party nominally pays the tax.

patterns of trade across locations.26 Reducing 𝜏𝑜𝑑 therefore reduces the
final price 𝑝𝑜𝑑 (𝑗) paid by consumers in 𝑑 for good 𝑗, which makes it
more competitive and (all else equal) raises its consumption.

The bilateral gravity equation can be transformed into a location-
level ‘‘market access’’ measure that is a reduced-form expression cap-
turing a location’s overall propensity to trade, both as a consumer
and a producer.27 Intuitively, market access aggregates the potential
value of trade with all destinations, where each destination is weighted
by its proximity and size. A location’s market access increases with
proximity to and with the size of those markets. Changes in market
access summarize the total direct and indirect effects on each location
from changes in the full bilateral matrix of trade costs.

We construct the matrix of bilateral trade costs in the following
way: physical trade costs 𝜙𝑜𝑑 are calculated by finding the lowest cost
routes between any two locations from existing road, railroad, and
waterway networks at each decade, which we take from Donaldson
and Hornbeck (2016) and Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2021). 𝜇𝑜𝑑 is the
shortest monetary distance between two locations. By law, locations 𝑜
and 𝑑 inside the national bank network have a common currency and
face no monetary transaction costs (𝜇𝑜𝑑 = 1). Outside of the network,
the common currency is not locally supplied to both the buyer and
the seller so one or both parties must pay redemption costs (𝜇𝑜𝑑 >
1) to convert into local currency or legal tender/specie. Redemption
requires physically sending the note to its origin and therefore entails
the physical transport costs along a route. We therefore proxy for 𝜇𝑜𝑑
with physical transport costs when a transaction occurs outside the
network in order to approximate the cost of physically obtaining notes,
the discount of converting non-local notes (which itself is a function of
distance), and the information frictions from using alternative payment
methods like checks or specie.28 We find the lowest cost route for both
trading partners to obtain a common currency, which can be national
bank notes (where one or both parties travels to the nearest location
with a national bank) or one of the local currencies (where one party
covers the distance to access the other). Fig. 1 provides examples of the
configurations of distances under each of these examples.

4.2. Measuring monetary market access

These components of physical and monetary trade costs generate
a bilateral matrix of trade costs between all 𝑜𝑑 pairs of locations and
allow us to calculate monetary market access for any location, which
we define as:

MMA𝑜 =

∑

𝑑

𝜇−𝜁
𝑜𝑑 𝜙−𝜃

𝑜𝑑,1870𝑁𝑑

(1)

where 𝜁 and 𝜃 are the trade elasticities with respect to each cost 𝜇
(monetary) and 𝜙 (physical) respectively, and 𝑁 is the size of the
destination trade partner.

26 The gravity result is very general across preferences, production functions,
and trade costs. Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) derives the set of
sufficient conditions which encompass many ways of modeling production
including for instance, both perfect competition and monopolistic competition.
27 Measuring the exact measure of market access in each location requires
simultaneously solving a system of equations such that all prices clear all
markets. However, Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) shows that a reduced
form approximation has a 99.99% correlation with the analytical solution. As
a result, we also rely on the approximation.

28 Note that even if physical money is not transported in these transactions,
and other payment mediums like checks are used instead, the relative mag-
nitudes of the frictions between being in the network versus outside of it
would still hold because national bank notes were still superior to alternatives
like checks. Empirically, we use the physical trade costs from Donaldson
and Hornbeck (2016) to proxy for these physical transport costs. It is worth
noting that those measures were constructed to capture the cost of transporting
freight, which may be different from the cost of moving physical bank notes.
However, measurement error in this proxy will primarily add noise to the
estimated effects.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038687C. Xu and H. Yang

Fig. 1. Minimum Monetary transaction frictions between towns. Notes: Fig. 1 provides a visual example of the different cases for calculating the minimum monetary transaction
frictions between towns. When both towns each have a national bank (NB = 1), then 𝜇 = 1 (Case 1). When only one town is in the network (B: NB = 1) while the other is not (A:
NB = 0) as in Case 2, there are two possibilities. If there is a third town (C: NB = 1) near town A with a national bank such that the distance between A and C (𝐴𝐶) is less than
the distance between A and B, then A can access the network via C and the transaction frictions are based on the distance between A and C. Otherwise, the monetary distance is
𝐴𝐵. Finally, in Case 3, both towns are not in the network and so there are two possibilities again: the first is that each town is close to a national bank and can therefore each
access the network independently; the second is that one of the towns uses the currency of the other by traveling there.

We calculate MMA𝑜 in two decades, the 1870s and 1880s. For the
1870s, we use the national bank network as of 1875, which we map in
Fig. 2(a), and the transportation network and populations as of 1870.
For the 1880s, we use the national bank network in 1885 but hold
fixed the transportation network to its 1870 appearance (denoted by
𝜙𝑜𝑑,1870).29 Doing so ensures that the changes in MMA across decades
come from changes in the locations of national banks rather than the
expansion of the physical transportation network. In our baseline, we
choose a monetary trade elasticity of 𝜁 = 1 and an overall trade
elasticity of 𝜃 = 4.30

We map our calculated measure of monetary market access in 1875
in Fig. 2(b). As expected, monetary market access is highest in the
northeast region where the national banking network is densest. It is
also higher in areas with lower physical transport costs, such as those
near major waterworks and railways.

In order to estimate the impact of increasing the supply of safe
money, we use the changes in the national bank network (Fig. 2(c)) to
calculate the changes in monetary market access (𝛥MMA) from 1875
to 1885 (Fig. 2(d)). A location’s MMA can increase because of a direct
reduction in monetary transaction frictions due to gaining its own
national bank or because of an indirect change in the national bank
network elsewhere. These two components do not combine linearly

since they depend on prices and market sizes that evolve jointly in
general equilibrium.

The change in MMA in a location (Fig. 2(d)) therefore differs from
a binary measure of the introduction of a national bank (Fig. 2(c))
in two key ways. First, it captures all the changes in transaction
costs in the entire network that impacts a location’s trade potential
even if the location itself does not gain a national bank. Second, it
captures the location’s trade potential to all destinations in aggregate,
weighing each destination’s importance based on its size and proximity.
These differences allow for heterogeneity in the degree of treatment: a
location that is already close to a national bank prior to receiving its
own national bank will not be impacted to the same degree as a location
in a monetary desert. Similarly, a location that is close to many large
markets will gain more from reducing transaction costs than a location
whose trade potential is low.

For example, Fig. 2(d) shows that New Mexico experienced a very
high change in monetary market access even though there was not a
single national bank introduced in the state. In contrast, many national
banks entered in the northeast region of the country, but the change
in MMA in that region is small and very similar to the changes in the
southeast where few national banks entered. These examples highlight
that it is important to account for how the full structure of the network
impacts an individual location’s trade potential.

29 We map the locations of national banks in 1885 in appendix Figure
A.6. Measures of MMA are very similar using 1870 and 1880 national bank
locations instead of our mid-decade networks. MMA1880 is also very similar
holding populations fixed to 1870 levels instead of using 1880 levels.

30 We provide robustness checks based on a range of 𝜃 values, including
𝜃 = 1 from recent quasi-experimental empirical work by Boehm et al. (2020),
𝜃 = 2 from Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2021), and 𝜃 = 8 from Donaldson and
Hornbeck (2016).

5. Empirical strategy

Our measure of the change in MMA includes two components: the
(endogenous) direct component due to a location gaining a national
bank and joining the network and the (exogenous) indirect compo-
nent from changes elsewhere in the network. We therefore adopt two
approaches to identify the relationship between changes in monetary
market access and real outcomes. Our first approach instruments for the

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038688C. Xu and H. Yang

Fig. 2. Geographical distribution of national banks and monetary market access. Notes: Fig. 2(a) plots the density of the national banking network at the county level using the
Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency published in 1875. Fig. 2(b) plots our calculated measure of MMA from Eq. (1). Darker shading reflects higher levels of MMA split
into seven equally sized bins. Oklahoma was an unincorporated territory that did not have the legal status to allow for national banks and so we do not include it in our data,
but distances are calculated allowing for travel through Oklahoma. Fig. 2(c) maps the change in national bank presence from 1875 to 1885. Fig. 2(d) maps the change in MMA
between 1875 and 1885 where we calculate MMA in each decade holding the transportation network fixed to its 1870 appearance. Bilateral physical transport costs in 1870 are
from Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016). The data for the locations of national banks each year are from the Annual Reports of the Comptroller of the Currency.

endogenous component of creating a national bank by using exogenous
variation in regulatory capital requirements. Our second approach
holds fixed the local national bank network and measures the change
in MMA using only distant changes in the network.

5.1. Instrumental variable approach

The direct measure of the change in MMA includes changes to a
location’s own direct access to national banks, which may be biased by
unobserved characteristics that are correlated with future growth.

We approach this endogeneity problem by using the regulatory
capital requirement for creating a national bank as an instrument
for the change in monetary market access. The capital requirement
was based on the size of the town in which the bank was chartered
to operate, and it doubled at each population threshold, shown in
Appendix Figure A.7. Towns with population less than 6,000 people
faced a capital requirement of $50,000 while those between 6,000 and
50,000 faced double the requirement of $100,000.31

A priori, the direction of the bias in the OLS is not obvious. For
example, assume that larger places have better growth potential and
are more likely to be able to generate bank equity. This force makes it
more likely that a location joins the national bank network and has
higher MMA. However, more growth is also associated with higher
population, making it more likely for the town to cross the 6,000

31 Locations with more than 50,000 people faced a $200,000 capital

requirement.

population threshold and to trigger a sharp increase in the required
bank equity. As a result, this would reduce the likelihood of creating a
bank and directly raising the location’s MMA. In this case, the OLS will
be downward biased.

In addition, while the concern is that banks enter in areas where
they expect to do well, conditional on entering at all, locations choose
between establishing a national bank or a state bank. Both types of
banks had costs, and the correlation between future growth potential
and the relative costs and benefits of each type of bank is not clear.
State banks were costly because their bank notes were taxed, but
national banks faced higher capital regulations and heavier regulations
on their asset allocation. In addition, they were politically unpopular
in ‘‘silver’’ areas, which further restricted their adoption.32 Therefore,
while we can expect a positive correlation between the overall number
of banks and future growth, the correlation between the composition of
these banks and future growth is a priori unsigned.

Our instrument for national bank entry in 1885 is an indicator
variable of a town being below the 6,000 population cut-off in 1880.
We focus on the first threshold at the 6,000 population mark because
cities near the 50,000 population mark all founded national banks

32 Specifically, national banks could not take land as collateral, which was
the main asset in the agricultural sector. National banks were also part of the
postbellum debate on whether to return to a bimetallic standard or to adopt
a pure gold standard. ‘‘Silver’’ interests were primarily rural and agricultural
while urban areas and financiers (including national banks) advocated for gold.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038689C. Xu and H. Yang

immediately after the passage of the Act.33 The validity of the instru-
ment relies on the premise that national bank entry is impacted by the
population threshold, but that the threshold was not chosen based on
the size of towns that demanded national banks in the 1880s. Given
that the legislation was written almost two decades prior to the entry
period we study, and that we focus on a small bandwidth around the
threshold, we consider it unlikely that policymakers could have so
accurately predicted and targeted this demand. In addition, we control
for population change in the pre-period to capture potential differences
in demand.

In order to implement the instrument, we restrict ourselves to
relevant locations by constructing our sample in the following way.
First, we select towns with fewer than 6,000 residents in 1870 that did
not have a national bank by 1875. These towns all faced the same lower
entry cost initially but did not have a national bank and lacked a local
supply of liquid bank notes. Second, we require that towns did not grow
or shrink beyond a population range of 4,000 to 8,000 in 1880 in order
to eliminate outliers that are unlikely to be similar in observable and
unobservable ways.

Within this sample, some towns crossed the 6,000 threshold in
1880 and faced double the capital requirement while the rest did not.
Remaining below the threshold is our instrument for positive direct
changes in MMA. As an example, consider towns A and B, each with
4,000 residents as of the 1870 census. In 1880, town A grew to a
population of 5,000, whereas town B grew to 7,000 people. Without
the capital requirement, the towns are close enough in size that they
are similarly able to sustain a bank. However, the discontinuity in the
requirement raises the entry costs significantly for town B relative to
A, thereby reducing the probability that it founds a national bank and
directly raises its monetary market access.

We use the instrumental approach as opposed to a regression dis-
continuity design because of the lack of density in the population dis-
tribution immediately around the cut-off.34 This identification strategy
follows a number of papers studying bank behavior in the postbellum
United States, and in particular those that use the National Banking
Act’s regulatory capital requirements based on population as a source of
exogenous variation (Fulford, 2015; Gou, 2016; Carlson et al., 2022).35
We combine this identification strategy with the empirical estimations
based on changes in MMA.

The identifying assumption for our empirical analysis of real effects
is that towns that crossed versus those that did not cross the 6,000
threshold in 1880, despite having the same population change, did
not experience a concomitant shock that would have impacted their
real outcomes afterward. We consider this unlikely for several rea-
sons. First, there is no evidence of any other regulation at the 6,000

33 Banks in large cities had sufficient capital to immediately convert to a
national charter, and so the capital requirements did not bind for them. Larger
cities also had less than a quarter of the entry costs per capita compared to
those around the 6,000 mark, so the barriers were also lower in real terms.
The real magnitudes of the $50,000 difference in required capital at the 6,000
mark was approximately 140 times the average manufacturing wage in 1880.
34 Figure A.4 shows the distribution of town size for all towns with between
2,000 and 10,000 population in 1880, represented by the uncolored bars. The
colored bars represent all towns with fewer than 6,000 people in 1870 that
did not have a national bank as of 1875. which is the relevant subsample of
towns for our analysis. The black bars represent the towns that we include in
our main sample.

35 Gou (2016) uses the introduction of a new population cutoff in the early
20th century to study the effect of capital requirements on bank stability.
Similarly to Fulford (2015) and Carlson et al. (2022), we focus on the 6,000
population cutoff in the 1880 census, and like the latter, we also control for
the change in town population following the previous census as a proxy for a
town’s overall growth trajectory. Carlson et al. (2022) focuses on a different
question, as it examines the role of bank competition on lending at a later
period with a different sample of towns where there was at least one national
bank in the initial period.

population threshold introduced around this period.36 Second, focusing
on a relatively narrow population bandwidth around the 6,000 cutoff
increases the likelihood that towns were comparable in both observable
and unobservable ways. Third, we provide evidence that towns in our
sample are not observably different during the pre-period.

Fig. 3 shows the coefficients and confidence intervals for both
conditional and unconditional covariate balance tests where we regress
each characteristic on an indicator variable for being below the 6,000
population threshold in 1880. Each regression is individually estimated,
and we normalize all dependent variables so that the magnitudes can
be interpreted as standard deviations from the mean. All variables are
measured in the decade before national bank entry unless otherwise
noted. The ‘‘Unconditional’’ regressions are estimated without controls,
and the ‘‘Conditional’’ regressions include state fixed effects and the
population change from 1870 to 1880. In terms of population, places
that are below the threshold in 1880 are slightly smaller in 1870,
unconditionally. After controlling for the population change, they are
significantly smaller, as expected.

It is unsurprising that towns that did not cross the population thresh-
old in 1880 had lower population changes. These differences could
potentially bias the results if they are correlated with a town’s real
outcomes through non-bank channels. For example, places that rapidly
expanded in the previous decade could continue to grow faster due to
agglomeration effects. We therefore control for population changes be-
tween 1870 and 1880 to account for a town’s overall growth trajectory
that could persist into subsequent decades.

First stage. We estimate the following first stage regression:

𝛥MMA𝑖,𝑠 = 𝛽I(Pop1880 < 6000)𝑖,𝑠 + 𝛤 ′𝑋𝑖,𝑠 + 𝜂𝑠 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑠

(2)

for town 𝑖 in state 𝑠. 𝛥MMA𝑖,𝑠 is the log change in monetary market
access in 1885 relative to 1875, and I(Pop1880 < 6000)𝑖,𝑠 is an indicator
variable for having a town population below the 6,000 threshold in
1880 census. 𝑋𝑖,𝑠 is a vector of control variables such as the population
change between 1870 and 1880, the number of railroads in 1875, the
number of state banks in 1876, and transportation market access in
1870.37 𝜂𝑠 denotes state fixed effects, which limits the estimation to
using within-state variation and accounts for unobserved state-level dif-
ferences such as regulatory changes between decades. All specifications
cluster standard errors by county.

𝛽 is our coefficient of interest, which captures the effect of being
below the population threshold in 1880 on the change in MMA between
1875 and 1885. Table 2 presents the first stage relationship as we
add control variables. The point estimate in column 6 indicates that
being below the population threshold in 1880 is associated with a 62%
increase in MMA in 1885 relative to 1875. This positive relationship
is robust to including a variety of control variables. Controlling for the
population trajectory (comparing column 1 to column 2) improves the
precision of the estimate and raises the first stage KP 𝐹 -stat from 3.3
to 7.4. Comparing the results also shows that the specification that
does not include the population control likely suffers from omitted
variable bias: places that grow more are likely to have both higher
demand for a national bank and to be above the population threshold,
which downward biases the effect of the capital constraint. Including
the population trajectory improves the comparability of locations in
the sample along this observable dimension. We therefore include the
change in population in the baseline specification.

We provide several robustness checks for the instrument. First,
we show that the instrument also predicts obtaining a national bank
directly (appendix Table A.2). Second, we show the effects for a range

36 State-level regulation changes are absorbed by the fixed effects in the

specifications, as are federal regulations that changed over time.

37 We use transportation market access from Donaldson and Hornbeck
(2016): tMA𝑜 = ∑

𝑑 𝜙−𝜃

𝑜𝑑 𝑁𝑑 .

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386810C. Xu and H. Yang

Fig. 3. Covariate balance. Notes: Fig. 3 plots the coefficients and 95% (in dark bands)
and 99% (in light bands) confidence intervals of individually estimated and normalized
regressions of: 𝑋𝑖,𝑠 = 𝛽I(Pop1880 < 6𝑘) + 𝜂𝑠 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑠 where 𝑋𝑖
is a location-level
characteristic and 𝜂𝑠 are state fixed effects. All variables are normalized to have mean
zero and standard deviation of one. Population is measured at the town level and all
other outcomes are at the county level. The conditional regressions include state fixed
effects and the population change from 1870 to 1880 as well. Railroads are from Atack
(2016) and measured in 1876. State and other non-national bank financial institutions
are obtained from the Banker’s Almanac and Register of 1876. Monetary market access is
calculated in 1875 using the physical transport network in 1870, and transport market
access (tMA) is calculated in 1870. Manufacturing and agricultural measures are from
their respective censuses of 1870. Standard errors are clustered by county.

Table 2
First stage relationship between population threshold and 𝛥MMA.

𝛥MMA

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

I(pop < 6k)

𝛥 Pop
tMA (1870)
Railroads (1875)
State banks (1876)

0.406*
(0.223)

0.715***
(0.264)
Y

0.634***
(0.207)
Y
Y

0.640***
(0.207)
Y
Y
Y

State FE
F -stat
N

Y
3.296
147

Y
7.353
147

Y
9.413
147

Y
9.565
147

0.619***
(0.200)
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
9.583
147

Notes: Table 2 estimates the first stage relationship: 𝛥MMA = 𝛽I(Pop1880 < 6000)𝑖,𝑠 +
𝛤 ′𝑋𝑖,𝑠 + 𝜂𝑠 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑠. 𝛥MMA is the log difference in monetary market access between 1885
and 1875, calculated according to Eq. (1). 𝛥Pop refers to the population change from
1870 to 1880. The log of transport market access cost (tMA) is calculated in 1870, and
the number of railroads and state banks are measured in 1875 and 1876, respectively.
Regressions are weighted by the share of the town population that is within our relevant
sample for the instrument within each county. The 𝐹 -stat is the first stage KP F. State
FEs are included in all specifications, and standard errors are clustered by county. * p
< 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

of 𝜃 parameters including 𝜃 = 1, 𝜃 = 2, and 𝜃 = 8 (appendix Table
A.3). The magnitudes of the estimates range from 0.57 to 0.62, which
are very similar to our baseline with 𝜃 = 4. Third, we provide the
first stage relationship for the change in MMA where we allow the
railroad network to change and we calculate MMA in 1885 using the
1880 physical transportation costs, which we denote as 𝛥MMA𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑙80

(appendix Table A.4). This first stage relationship has slightly larger
magnitudes and an 𝐹 -stat of 15.7.

5.2. Network change approach

Our second empirical approach uses the variation in the monetary
market access measure that does not come directly from the local
introduction of a national bank. We denote this measure ‘‘MMA−𝑂’’ to
highlight that the origin location’s own national bank is not included.
We expand the radius to 25, 50, and 100 miles from a location to ensure
that this measure does not pick up potential changes in credit supply
in the broader area or local productivity shock that might have larger
spillovers. We construct our measures of ‘‘MMA−𝑂,𝑟’’ (for each radius 𝑟)
by holding fixed the national bank network to its 1875 configuration
within that radius. Since these measures do not include the endogenous
component of a location’s own choice to introduce a national bank, we
can estimate its relationship to our real outcomes with OLS.

5.3. Specification to estimate real effects

We estimate the impact of entry on real outcomes using difference-
in-differences that absorb time trends between periods and location-
average differences. Our baseline regressions take the following form:

𝛥𝑌𝑖,𝑠 = 𝛽𝛥MMA𝑖,𝑠 + 𝛤 ′𝑋𝑖,𝑠 + 𝜂𝑠 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑠

(3)

where 𝛥𝑌𝑖,𝑠 is the change in an outcome in town 𝑖 in state 𝑠 in 1890
relative to 1880. 𝛥MMA𝑖,𝑠 is the change in monetary market access,
which takes the forms in our two approaches: ̂𝛥MMA𝑖,𝑠 is predicted
from the instrument, and 𝛥MMA−𝑂,𝑠 is based on changes elsewhere in
the network. We standardize the units so that all of the results are in
terms of a one standard deviation increase in a given measure. 𝛽 is the
main coefficient of interest, which captures the change of the output
response to having a national bank. 𝑋𝑖𝑠 is a vector of control variables,
and 𝜂𝑠 denotes state fixed effects. Time-invariant characteristics of the
locations are subsumed by the first differences, and standard errors are
clustered by county.

Since national banks are established in towns within counties but
our outcomes are at the county level, we weight our regressions with
the share of county population within the town. The statistical signifi-
cance of our results is not sensitive to the weighting, which we show in
robustness tables in the appendix. However, we maintain the weighted
version as our baseline because they produce more conservative mag-
nitudes.

Our specifications also address the possibility that our results are
being driven by changes in physical transport costs. First, our baseline
measure of MMA is calculated holding transportation costs fixed to
1870 values so that monetary market access varies due to changes
in 𝜇 (monetary frictions) across decades rather than changes in 𝜙.38
Second, we include levels of physical trade costs and overall financial
development measured in the pre-period as part of our standard set of
controls.

5.4. Addressing the credit supply channel

The introduction of safe bank notes occurred through national
banks, and so it is important to discuss the possibility that the esti-
mated effects capture a classic credit supply channel as opposed to a
transaction friction channel. We address this possibility in three ways,
although we fully acknowledge that the nature of the development of

38 Appendix Table A.4 presents the first stage results for an alternative
measure of the change in market access that allows the transport network
to change.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386811C. Xu and H. Yang

the monetary system in the United States precludes us from shutting
down this channel completely.

estimated coefficient of 116.7 implies that a one standard deviation
increase in market access raises traded goods production by 15.1%.

First, in our instrumental approach (Section 5.1), we directly control
for the total volume of loans observed on the balance sheets of the
national banks in each location. This control variable captures changes
in credit that would be reflected in overall volumes but does not capture
differences that would appear in other characteristics of the loans, for
example its duration or interest rate. We therefore view the robustness
of our results to the inclusion of this control as evidence that this
specific form of the credit supply channel is not driving our results.

Second, we also directly control for the weighted average change
in the total volume of loans in all destinations that a location can
trade with. We construct this control in an analogous manner to market
access where changes to credit supply in destinations that are physically
closer to a location are weighed more than changes in destinations
farther away.39

For both of these approaches, our first stage estimation also includes
these additional control variables. Appendix Table A.5 presents these
results where 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑜 and 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑑 are included separately in columns
6–7, and both are included in column 8. The first stage remains highly
statistically significant, and the 𝐹 -stats range from 7 to 10 in all of these
specifications.

Third, as explained in Section 5.2, we use the change in the network
coming from outside the city and hold fix the city characteristics, such
that this source of variation is orthogonal to city level shocks like
changes in credit supply and does not rely on the city benefiting from
the entry of a new national bank.

6. Results

In this section, we present the results on how access to national
banks impacted the local economy, first in overall traded output, and
then in the composition of output and the sources of growth.

6.1. Tradables production

The general result in the economic geography literature is that firm
production is tied to its distance to the markets in which its output is
sold, so we begin by examining the impact of higher monetary market
access on real activity in the tradable sector (e.g., Harris, 1954; Redding
and Venables, 2004; Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016). We measure the
tradable sector with the total value of agricultural and manufacturing
output, which we scale by the population in each county.40

Table 3 columns 1 to 3 present our result for both the OLS and the
second stage of the IV approach. Column 1 only includes the baseline
controls of the pre-period population change and state fixed effects.
Column 2 also controls for pre-period financial development (non-
national banks), transportation trade costs (railroads), and the level of
physical MA in 1870. Column 3 includes the total amount of lending
by national banks in each location in 1885 (𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑜) and the aggregate
change in lending in all destinations (𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑑 ). While the magnitudes of
the effects are larger after controlling for these two sources of credit,
they are within one standard error of the coefficient estimated without
these controls and therefore not significantly different from a statistical
perspective.41

In the bottom panel, our instrumented second stage effects ( ̂𝛥MMA)
are positive and statistically significant in our preferred specifications
with controls. Compared to the pre-period mean values of 775.6, the

39 Specifically, we construct the measure the following way (and denote it
Loans𝑑 in a slight abuse of notation): Loans𝑑 = ∑
40 We use the number of men above the age of 21 as our baseline per capita

𝛥 ln(Loans𝑑 ).

𝑑 𝜙−𝜃

𝑜𝑑,1870

measure, but the results are robust to other population measures.

41 Appendix Table A.5 reports the first stage relationship with these

additional control variables in columns 6–8.

The estimated magnitudes range from 115.3 (14.9%) when we set
𝜃 = 1 to 125.5 (16.2%) when we set 𝜃 = 8 (appendix Table A.6 columns
1 to 5). In the unweighted regression, the estimated coefficient is 202.5
(26.1%) with 𝑝-value of 0.04 (appendix Table A.6 column 5). These
magnitudes are almost double the baseline magnitudes for the weighted
regression since they do not adjust for the share of the county in the
treated town. We also estimate the second stage effects when we cal-
culate 𝛥MMA allowing for physical transport costs to change between
decades, and the effects are also statistically significant at the 0.04 level
(appendix Table A.6 column 6). In addition, in every specification we
provide 95% confidence intervals from the Moreira (2003) conditional
likelihood ratio (CLR) test with the p-value of significance in italicized
parentheses below. These confidence intervals are constructed from
unweighted regressions to also address inference concerns from low
first stage 𝐹 -stats. These confidence intervals imply a 𝑝-value of 0.04
in all specifications. In appendix Table A.16 columns 1–2, we include
higher order polynomials of the change in population and show that
the results have very similar magnitudes and statistical significance. In
appendix Table A.17 columns 1–2, we add the direct lending controls
at origin and destination individually and show that the magnitudes are
similar and statistically significant.

In Table 3 columns 4 and 5, we present the OLS results for the direct
relationship between MMA calculated only from changes in national
bank entry outside of a given radius (𝛥MMA−𝑂 and 𝛥MMA−𝑜𝑑,25, for
the county and 25 miles, respectively). We find statistically significant
magnitudes of 6.2% and 6.8% percent of the pre-period mean. In
appendix Table A.13 columns 1–4, we present the coefficients and
standard errors for 𝛥MMA−𝑂,𝑟 for the different set of controls and at
the other radiuses 𝑟. Each coefficient is from an individually estimated
regression with the control variables indicated at the bottom of the
column. All of these effects are similar in magnitude and statistically
significant. At a radius of 100 miles, the estimates are noisier, as would
be expected given that there are an increasing number of true changes
to the national bank network as the perimeter widens.

Our second set of results presented in Table 3 columns 6 to 10
zooms in on the agricultural sector and measures the change in the
intensity of tradables goods production using the share of production
in commodities goods in total agricultural production. Commodities
are defined as those listed on the Chicago Board of Trade, which were
grains including wheat, oats, buckwheat, and corn.42 We assume that
commodities, which have a national market, sell locally at final prices
that vary with the national price.43 As a result, reductions in local trade
frictions pass on more fully to producers in the form of higher profits,
which incentivize agricultural producers to tilt their production toward
these goods.

The magnitude of the instrumented effects with controls in column
8 (0.02) relative to the pre-entry mean of 0.91 indicates that a one
standard deviation increase in monetary market access increased the
share of traded crop production by approximately 2.3%. As in the case
for overall tradables production, the effects are similarly statistically
significant for different values of 𝜃, the unweighted regression, and the
alternative measure of change in MMA (appendix Table A.7).

In columns 9 and 10, we present the results for our second approach.
We find a statistically significant effect of 1.5% relative to the pre-
period mean for the average location for a one standard deviation
increase in the change in MMA (holding fixed the network in the loca-
tion’s county). These effects are also robust to different combinations
of control variables (appendix Table A.17 columns 3 to 5) at all of the
different radiuses 𝑟 (appendix Table A.13 columns 5 to 8).

42 The census does not record the values of production in each good, but
only the volumes and acres of land used. We calculate the share of acres for
these products in total agricultural land.

43 Specifically, we assume that price 𝑝 for good 𝑖 trading between locations
𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 + 𝛾𝑜 + 𝛿𝑑 where 𝛽 > 0. With these

𝑜 and 𝑑 can be modeled as: 𝑝𝑖
assumptions, it is not necessary for 𝛾 and 𝛿 to equal 0.

𝑜𝑑 = 𝛽𝑝𝑖

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386812C. Xu and H. Yang

Table 3
Traded output (1880–1890).

Tradables production

Commodities share

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

OLS
𝛥MMA

𝛥MMA−𝑂

𝛥MMA−𝑜𝑑25

IV: Second stage
𝛥̂MMA

State FE
Controls
Loans𝑜
Loans𝑑
Mean of Dep. Var.
N

54.06**
(22.91)

58.10***
(21.45)

81.63***
(20.21)

0.0211***
(0.00583)

0.0179***
(0.00538)

0.0207***
(0.00625)

47.95**
(23.49)

0.0140**
(0.00672)

0.0148**
(0.00699)

69.94*
(39.33)

116.7**
(50.91)

67.94
(42.82)

Y

Y
Y

775.6
147

775.6
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
775.6
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
775.6
147

52.79**
(23.99)

Y
Y
Y
Y
775.6
147

0.0201***
(0.00724)

0.0184***
(0.00684)

0.0216**
(0.00913)

Y

Y
Y

0.905
147

0.905
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.905
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.905
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.905
147

Notes: Table 3 presents the OLS (panel 1) and instrumented second stage of the regression in Eq. (3) (panel 2). The independent variable 𝛥MMA is the log change in MMA from
1875 to 1885, calculated according to Eq. (1). 𝛥MMA−𝑂 is similarly calculated based on changes outside a location assuming that its own national bank status does not change.
𝛥MMA−𝑜𝑑25 is the change outside a location with distance variation assuming that its own national bank status does not change, excluding the changes to national banks in counties
within the 25 mile ranges. The inputs to MMA are bilateral transport costs measured in 1870 using the measures from Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), populations in 1870 and
1880 from the respective censuses of population, and the locations of national banks in 1885 from the Annual Reports of the Comptroller of the Currency. There are no national
banks in the locations in our sample in 1875 by construction. We use 𝜃 = 4 in our baseline measure. All regressions include state fixed effects. The vector of control variables
includes the number of railroads and state banks measured in 1875 and 1876, respectively, and the log value of transport market access in 1870. The control variable for ‘‘Loans𝑜’’
is the log value of lending by national banks in 1885. The control variable ‘‘Loans𝑑 ’’ is the average change in log lending by national banks at destinations, with destinations
weighted by physical transport proximity. The dependent variable in columns 1 to 5 is the change in per capita (male population over age 21) value of total manufacturing and
agricultural production from 1880 to 1890. The dependent variable in columns 6 to 10 is the share of agricultural production in commodity goods measured in terms of acreage
of farmland used. We report the mean of the dependent variable measured in 1880. Regressions are weighted by the share of town population within a county, and standard
errors are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

6.2. Manufacturing sector growth and structural transformation

Having shown that national bank entry led to overall growth and
more specialization in trade-cost sensitive goods, we next turn to the
effect of national banks on manufacturing sector growth. First, there
is an increase in overall manufacturing production, which we show in
Table 4, columns 1 to 5. Using our IV approach, we find a statistically
significant increase of 13.1% manufacturing production per capita from
a one standard deviation increase in monetary market access (column
3). Our second approach using changes outside the county (column 4),
or a radius of 25 miles (column 5), yields magnitudes of 7.5% and 8.5%
for the average location respectively.

Appendix Tables A.8 and A.9 show that these results are robust to
different values of 𝜃, to being unweighted, and to the alternative mea-
sure of MMA that allows for changes in physical trade costs. As before,
the other parameterizations of 𝜃 are very similar, and the effects are
larger in magnitude in the unweighted regressions. In all specifications,
the Conditional Likelihood Ratio (CLR) confidence intervals imply a 𝑝-
value significance of 0.02 for total production and inputs, while they
are not significant for capital. Appendix Tables A.17 and A.14 show that
the second approach is robust to different configurations of controls and
additional radiuses respectively.

We next directly assess the input-sourcing market access chan-
nel where being able to reduce the effective distance to the markets
where inputs are sourced also benefits firms (e.g., Redding and Ven-
ables, 2004). In particular, manufacturing is dependent on the price,
quantity, and quality of inputs, and higher MMA allows local manufac-
turers to import more and better inputs in addition to exporting more
transformed goods (e.g., Goldberg et al., 2010).

In columns 6 to 10 of Table 4 we assess the impact on inputs usage.
We find that there is a statistically significant increase in manufacturing
inputs per capita of 11.4% using our first approach (column 8) and
6.7%–7.7% using our second approach (columns 9 to 10). In appendix
Table A.10, we show that the magnitudes of the effects for manufac-
turing capital are almost an order of magnitude smaller (1.6%) and not
statistically significant.

There are several possible explanations for the smaller effects on
capital. First, regulations encouraged national banks to make short-
term loans rather than long-term loans (White, 1998). These loans
provided working capital to meet short-term liquidity needs rather than
long-term investment needs. The short-term credit may have also facil-
itated inputs sourcing since trade financing mostly provides working
capital (e.g., Feenstra et al., 2014; Matray et al., 2023), and the lack
of long-term credit provision limited manufacturers’ ability to acquire
physical capital. Second, since the national banks were unit banks, their
ability to diversify their loan portfolio with borrowers across different
places was limited, which could discourage them from expanding their
balance sheets. Third, large values of firm investment could not be
easily accommodated as a national bank could lend no more than 10%
of its capital stock to one entity.44 These numerous requirements could
impede long-term investment in the manufacturing sector even while
it directly benefited from lower monetary transaction frictions.

Having shown that the manufacturing sector grows overall, and
that this growth partly comes from better sourcing of inputs, we
next show in Table 5 that the share of manufacturing production and
employment in the economy also increases, consistent with a process
of structural transformation. In our preferred specification with the full
set of controls, a one standard deviation increase in monetary market
access leads to a 11.1% increase in the share of manufacturing. Our
second approach in columns 4 and 5 yield effects of 8.4% and 9.4%
respectively.

The growth in the share of manufacturing output overall is reflected
in the increased share of employment in the sector. In Table 5 column
9, we find an 8.4% increase in the manufacturing labor share. As
in all other cases, these effects are statistically significant and robust
to different values of 𝜃, the unweighted versions of the regressions,
and the change in MMA allowing for growth in the physical transport
network (Appendix Tables A.11 and A.12). Coefficients are very similar

44 That is to say, a bank with $50,000 of capital stock could lend no more

than $5,000 to a firm. Source: National Banking Act of 64, Sec. 29.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386813C. Xu and H. Yang

Table 4
Manufacturing sector production (1880–1890).

OLS
𝛥MMA

𝛥MMA−𝑂

𝛥MMA−𝑜𝑑25

IV: Second stage
𝛥̂MMA

State FE
Controls
Loans𝑜
Loans𝑑
Mean of Dep. Var.
N

Manu production

Manu inputs

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

50.97**
(19.66)

56.74***
(18.63)

81.75***
(18.99)

31.59***
(11.47)

32.41***
(10.78)

43.55***
(11.87)

25.68*
(14.69)

Y
Y
Y
Y
380.9
147

29.16*
(14.94)

Y
Y
Y
Y
380.9
147

46.87*
(23.66)

Y
Y
Y
Y
626.4
147

53.51**
(23.82)

Y
Y
Y
Y
626.4
147

72.43**
(36.35)

119.5**
(49.77)

70.74*
(40.68)

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
626.4
147

47.04***
(18.04)

69.23***
(25.44)

46.44**
(19.46)

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
380.9
147

626.4
147

626.4
147

380.9
147

380.9
147

Notes: Table 4 presents the OLS (panel 1) and instrumented second stage of the regression in Eq. (3) (panel 2). The independent variable 𝛥MMA is the log change in MMA from
1875 to 1885, calculated according to Eq. (1). 𝛥MMA−𝑂 is similarly calculated based on changes outside a location assuming that its own national bank status does not change.
𝛥MMA−𝑜𝑑25 is the change outside a location with distance variation assuming that its own national bank status does not change, excluding the changes to national banks in counties
within the 25 mile ranges. The inputs to MMA are bilateral transport costs measured in 1870 using the measures from Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), populations in 1870 and
1880 from the respective censuses of population, and the locations of national banks in 1885 from the Annual Reports of the Comptroller of the Currency. There are no national
banks in the locations in our sample in 1875 by construction. We use 𝜃 = 4 in our baseline measure. All regressions include state fixed effects. The vector of control variables
includes the number of railroads and state banks measured in 1875 and 1876, respectively, and the log value of transport market access in 1870. The control variable for ‘‘𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑜’’
is the log value of lending by national banks in 1885. The control variable ‘‘𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑑 ’’ is the average change in log lending by national banks at destinations, with destinations
weighted by physical transport proximity. The dependent variables are the change in per capita (male population over age 21) manufacturing production (columns 1 to 5) and
manufacturing inputs (columns 6 to 10). We report the mean of the dependent variable measured in 1880. Regressions are weighted by the share of town population within a
county, and standard errors are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 5
Structural transformation (1880–1890).

Manu production share

Manu employment share

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0335**
(0.0137)

0.0592***
(0.0128)

0.0804***
(0.0162)

0.0388***
(0.0121)

0.0393***
(0.0131)

0.0519***
(0.0133)

0.0606***
(0.0219)

0.0679***
(0.0218)

0.0275**
(0.0136)

0.0302**
(0.0141)

0.0485**
(0.0232)

0.0691**
(0.0311)

0.0333
(0.0234)

Y

Y
Y

0.721
147

0.721
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.721
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.721
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.721
147

0.0621***
(0.0211)

0.0658***
(0.0197)

0.0992***
(0.0326)

Y

Y
Y

0.329
147

0.329
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.329
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.329
147

Y
Y
Y
Y
0.329
147

OLS
𝛥MMA

𝛥MMA−𝑂

𝛥MMA−𝑜𝑑25

IV: Second stage
𝛥̂MMA

State FE
Controls
Loans𝑜
Loans𝑑
Mean of Dep. Var.
N

Notes: Table 5 presents the OLS (panel 1) and instrumented second stage of the regression in Eq. (3) (panel 2). The independent variable 𝛥MMA is the log change in MMA
from 1875 to 1885, calculated according to Eq. (1). 𝛥MMA−𝑂 is similarly calculated based on changes outside a location assuming that its own national bank status does not
change. 𝛥MMA−𝑜𝑑25 is the change outside a location with distance variation assuming that its own national bank status does not change, excluding the changes to national banks
in counties within the 25 mile ranges. The inputs to MMA are bilateral transport costs measured in 1870 using the measures from Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), populations
in 1870 and 1880 from the respective censuses of population, and the locations of national banks in 1885 from the Annual Reports of the Comptroller of the Currency. There are
no national banks in the locations in our sample in 1875 by construction. We use 𝜃 = 4 in our baseline measure. All regressions include state fixed effects. The vector of control
variables includes the number of railroads and state banks measured in 1875 and 1876, respectively, and the log value of transport market access in 1870. The control variable
for ‘‘Loans𝑜’’ is the log value of lending by national banks in 1885. The control variable ‘‘Loans𝑑 ’’ is the average change in log lending by national banks at destinations, with
destinations weighted by physical transport proximity. The dependent variable in columns 1 to 5 is the change in the share of production in the manufacturing sector from 1880
to 1890. The dependent variable in columns 6 to 10 is the change in the share of employment in the manufacturing sector (calculated as manufacturing employment divided by
male population over age 21) from 1880 to 1890. We report the mean of the dependent variable measured in 1880. Regressions are weighted by the share of town population
within a county, and standard errors are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

across the specifications and are larger in the unweighted specification.
Appendix Tables A.15 and A.17 show that these effects are all robust
to different configurations of control variables and distance radiuses.

Discussion of the role of direct investment. Our results indicate that a
change in market access expands the traded sector overall and the
manufacturing sector in particular. While it is ultimately not possible

to eliminate the possibility that some of these effects are due to a direct
increase in credit supply from national banks, we have several reasons
to believe this is unlikely in our case.

First, in all of our specifications, directly controlling for the amount
of lending locally does not change our results. Second, we find similar
and statistically significant effects when we use our measure of the
change in monetary market access that does not use any variation in

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386814C. Xu and H. Yang

the changes to national bank presence near a location. Third, within the
manufacturing sector, our results are not driven by changes to capital
investment. Fourth, the credit supply channel does not generate predic-
tions about the changes in the composition of agricultural production
that we find.

6.3. Long-term effects

In our final set of results, we turn to examining the long-run impact
of these decadal changes in monetary market access by analyzing
the long-run impact on innovation and manufacturing output. The
reduction in trade costs can generate innovation through two channels:
first, the market access channel increases the number of potential
consumers that producers can reach, which increases the incentives to
innovate; second, improvements in sourcing inputs can lead to quality
upgrading (e.g, Schmookler, 1954; Lileeva and Trefler, 2010; Melitz
and Redding, 2021).

The historical innovation data are from Petralia et al. (2016), which
records the number of patents obtained by residents within a county
each year. Since innovation rates are lumpy, we use the cumulative
growth in patenting as our main dependent ratio and winsorize at 5%.
Fig. 4(a) plots the cumulative growth (normalized to equal 1 in 1880)
relative to the base years (1860–1865) for each group of locations:
those with above median changes in their monetary market access
(dark squares) and those with below median changes (light crosses).
The aggregate pattern is clear: as of 1880, there is no difference in the
cumulative growth in innovation, but after 1880 there is a growing
divergence such that by 1910, the ratio of accumulated patents is
approximately 1.3 times larger in the above-median group.

Fig. 4(b) plots the annual event study difference-in-difference with
the network changes in monetary market access as the main indepen-
dent variable, which exhibits similar patterns: there are no differential
pre-trends before 1880, but by 1885 there is a significantly positive gap
between the two groups. These effects continue to accumulate before
plateauing at a statistically significant average post-period coefficient
value of 1.3.

Next, we examine the long-run impact on the manufacturing sector,
which during this period was the main producer and beneficiary of
innovation. Fig. 4(c) plots the magnitudes and 95% confidence in-
tervals of the estimated effects and shows that the heightened levels
of manufacturing remained persistently high as well. The figure also
indicates that there were no differential pre-trends between the places
that received national banks versus those that did not.45

7. Conclusion

This paper studies the real effects of introducing a new currency
that was safe from redemption risks and costs on different sectors of
the economy in the historical context of the late 19th century United
States. We use a market access approach to quantify the impact of a less
frictional medium of exchange on the aggregate economy. Intuitively,
this approach allows us to assess how much the overall ‘‘distance’’ to
potential markets (monetary market access) changes as a function of
the changes in the national banking network.

We find that increasing a location’s monetary market access leads to
more production of traded goods, a shift in production towards the most
trade-cost sensitive goods, and a larger manufacturing share. These
effects, along with higher rates of innovation, persisted for several
decades.

Overall, our results indicate that stabilizing the value of assets
used as a medium of exchange had real economic benefits, especially

Fig. 4. Persistent positive effect on patenting and manufacturing activity. Notes:
Fig. 4(a) plots the cumulative growth of patent number (normalized to equal 1 in 1880)
relative to the base years (1860–1865) for each group of locations: those with above
median changes in their monetary market access (dark squares) and those with below
median changes (light crosses). Fig. 4(b) shows the annual diff-in-diff coefficients for
the estimated effect of standardized values of 𝛥MMA−𝑂 on cumulative patent growth
each year. Fig. 4(c) shows the decadal diff-in-diff coefficients for manufacturing output
per capita. We control for location fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, and the full
vector of control variables interacted with year fixed effects. Regressions are weighted
by the share of town population within a county measured in 1880, and standard errors
are two-way clustered at the county and year (decade) level. 1880 is the omitted year
(decade), and the vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals.

for sectors that were likely more exposed to payments frictions. As
financial technology progresses and new digital currencies present
alternative payment methods, these lessons from the historical national
banking era can provide policymakers additional guidance on the costs
of transactions frictions arising from the lack of full safety of monetary
instruments.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

45 Data from the 1910 Census of Manufacturers is not available, so we
stop our analysis before 1920 given the disruptions due to WWI and the
establishment of the Federal Reserve System.

Chenzi Xu: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Visu-
alization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition,

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386815C. Xu and H. Yang

Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. He Yang: Writing
- review & editing, Writing - original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization.

Carlson, Mark, Correia, Sergio, Luck, Stephan, 2022. The effects of banking competition
on growth and financial stability: Evidence from the national banking era. J. Polit.
Econ. 130 (2), 462–520.

Carothers, Neil, 1930. Fractional Money: A History of the Small Coins and Fractional

Paper Currency of the United States. J. Wiley & Sons, Incorporated.

Catalini, Christian, de Gortari, Alonso, 2021. On the economic design of stablecoins.

Declaration of competing interest

Available at SSRN 3899499.

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Real Effects of Supplying Safe Private Money (Original data) (Mende-
ley Data)
.

Acknowledgments

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article, and the authors thank
him for valuable guidance. The authors also thank Adrien Matray for
numerous discussions. Philip Ager, Rick Hornbeck, and Martin Rotem-
berg generously shared data. We also thank Anat Admati, Brian Beach,
Asaf Bernstein, Michael Bordo, John Campbell, Lauren Cohen, William
Diamond, James Feigenbaum, Carola Frydman, Andrew Garin, Michela
Giorcelli, Claudia Goldin, Gary Gorton, Walker Hanlon, Arvind Krish-
namurthy, Christopher M. Meissner, Nathan Nunn, Siddharth George,
Robin Greenwood, Alberto Manconi, Santiago Perez, Sarah Quincy,
Tzachi Raz, Hugh Rockoff, Amit Seru, Jann Spiess, Jeremy Stein, Adi
Sunderam, as well as seminar and conference participants at Harvard,
Yale, UC Davis, Einaudi Institute, HKUST, NBER DAE, EHA, the AEAs,
and Stanford SITE for helpful comments. Wenyi Yin, Jiayi Cheng,
William Halverson, and Peilin Yang provided excellent research assis-
tance. We are grateful for financial support from The Lab for Economic
Applications and Policy (LEAP) at Harvard, the Harvard Department
of Economics Summer Research Fellowship, the King Center Junior
Faculty Research Grant at Stanford, and National Science Foundation
(NSF) Grant 2117003.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Catalini, Christian, Shah, Nihar, 2021. Setting standards for stablecoin reserves.

Available at SSRN.

Coppola, Antonio, Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Xu, Chenzi, 2023. Liquidity, Debt
Denomination, and Currency Dominance. National Bureau of Economics Research.
Costinot, Arnaud, Rodríguez-Clare, Andrés, 2014. Trade theory with numbers: Quanti-
fying the consequences of globalization. In: Handbook of International Economics,
vol. 4, Elsevier, pp. 197–261.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gorton, Gary, Holmström, Bengt, Ordonez, Guillermo, 2017. Banks as

secret keepers. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (4), 1005–1029.

Diamond, Douglas W., Dybvig, Philip H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and

liquidity. J. Polit. Econ. 91 (3), 401–419.

Donaldson, Dave, Hornbeck, Richard, 2016. Railroads and American economic growth:

A ‘‘market access’’ approach. Q. J. Econ. 131 (2), 799–858.

Eaton,

Jonathan, Kortum, Samuel, 2002. Technology, geography, and trade.

Econometrica 70 (5), 1741–1779.

Eichengreen, Barry, 2019. From Commodity to Fiat and Now to Crypto: What Does

History Tell Us?. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Feenstra, Robert C., Li, Zhiyuan, Yu, Miaojie, 2014. Exports and credit constraints under
incomplete information: Theory and evidence from China. Rev. Econ. Stat. 96 (4),
729–744.

Fonseca, Julia, Matray, Adrien, 2024. Financial inclusion, economic development, and

inequality: Evidence from Brazil. J. Financ. Econom. 156.

Friedman, Milton, Schwartz, Anna Jacobson, 1965. A Monetary History of the United

States, 1867-1960. Princeton University Press.

Fulford, Scott L., 2015. How important are banks for development? National banks in

the united states, 1870–1900. Rev. Econ. Stat. 97 (5), 921–938.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, Khandelwal, Amit Kumar, Pavcnik, Nina, Topalova, Petia,
2010. Imported intermediate inputs and domestic product growth: Evidence from
India. Q. J. Econ. 125 (4), 1727–1767.

Gorton, Gary, 1999. Pricing free bank notes. J. Monetary Econ. 44, 33–64.
Gorton, Gary, Laarits, Toomas, Muir, Tyler, 2022a. Mobile collateral versus immobile

collateral. J. Money Credit Bank..

Gorton, Gary, Pennacchi, George, 1990. Financial intermediaries and liquidity creation.

J. Finance 45 (1), 49–71.

Gorton, Gary B., Ross, Chase P., Ross, Sharon Y., 2022b. Making Money. National

Bureau of Economic Research.

Gorton, Gary B., Zhang, Jeffery, 2021. Taming wildcat stablecoins. Available at SSRN

3888752.

Gou, Michael, 2016. Did capital requirements promote bank stability in the early 20th

century United States?.

Greenfield, Robert L., Rockoff, Hugh, 1990. A tale of two dollars: currency competition

and the return to gold, 1865–1879.

Greenfield, Robert L., Rockoff, Hugh, 1995. Gresham’s law in nineteenth-century

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

America. J. Money Credit Bank. 27 (4), 1086–1098.

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103868.

References

Admati, Anat, Hellwig, Martin, 2014. The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with

Harris, Chauncy D., 1954. The market as a factor in the localization of industry in the

United States. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 44 (4), 315–348.

Herrendorf, Berthold, Rogerson, Richard, Valentinyi, Akos, 2014. Growth and structural

transformation. Handb. Econ. Growth 2, 855–941.

Holmström, Bengt, 2015. Understanding the role of debt in the financial system.
Hornbeck, Richard, 2010. Barbed wire: Property rights and agricultural development.

Banking and What to Do About It. Princeton University Press.

Q. J. Econ. 125 (2), 767–810.

Ales, Laurence, Carapella, Francesca, Maziero, Pricila, Weber, Warren E., 2008. A model

of banknote discounts. J. Econom. Theory 142 (1), 5–27.

Amiti, Mary, Weinstein, David E., 2011. Exports and financial shocks. Q. J. Econ. 126

(4), 1841–1877.

Appleton, Nathan, 1831. An Examination of the Banking System of Massachusetts: In
Reference to the Renewal of the Bank Charters, vol. 137, Stimpson and Clapp.
Atack, Jeremy, 2016. Historical geographic information systems (GIS) database of U.S.

railroads for 1870 to 1890.

Bell, Spurgeon, 1912. Profit on national bank notes. Am. Econ. Rev. 2 (1), 38–60.
Boehm, Christoph E., Levchenko, Andrei A., Pandalai-Nayar, Nitya, 2020. The Long
and Short (Run) of Trade Elasticities. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bolt, Wilko, Frost, Jon, Shin, Hyun Song, Wierts, Peter, 2023. The Bank of Amsterdam

Hornbeck, Richard, Rotemberg, Martin, 2021. Railroads, Market Access, and Aggregate
Productivity Growth. University of Chicago Booth School of Business, mimeo.
James, John A., Weiman, David F., 2010. From drafts to checks: the evolution of
correspondent banking networks and the formation of the modern US payments
system, 1850–1914. J. Money Credit Bank. 42 (2–3), 237–265.

Jaremski, Matthew, 2014. National banking’s role in U.S. industrialization, 1850-1900.

J. Econ. Hist. 74, 109–140.

Ji, Yan, Teng, Songyuan, Townsend, Robert M., 2023. Dynamic bank expansion: spatial
growth, financial access, and inequality. J. Polit. Econ. 131 (8), 2209–2275.
Kinley, David, 1910. The Use of Credit Payments in Payments in the United States,

vol. 339, US Government Printing Office.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, Wright, Randall, 1989. On money as a medium of exchange. J.

and the limits of fiat money.

Polit. Econ. 97 (4), 927–954.

Bordo, Michael D., 1998. Currency Crises (And Banking Crises) in Historical Perspective.

Knox, John Jay, 1900. A History of Banking in the United States. BradFord Rhodes

Stockholm School of Economics Research Report, (10).
Ignacio, Rockoff, Hugh, 2005. Do economists

Briones,

free-banking episodes? Econ. J. Watch 2 (2), 279.

reach a conclusion on

Cagan, Phillip, 1963. The first

fifty years of

the national banking system.

In:

and Company.

Landon-Lane, John, Rockoff, Hugh, 2007. The origin and diffusion of shocks to regional
interest rates in the United States, 1800-2002. Explor. Econ. Hist. 44 (3), 487–500.
Lileeva, Alla, Trefler, Daniel, 2010. Improved access to foreign markets raises plant-level

Carson, Deane (Ed.), Banking and Monetary Studies. Vol. 15, p. 42.

productivity. . . for some plants. Q. J. Econ. 125 (3), 1051–1099.

Calomiris, Charles W., Gorton, Gary, 1991. The origins of banking panics: models,
facts, and bank regulation. In: Financial Markets and Financial Crises. University
of Chicago Press, pp. 109–174.

Matray, Adrien, Mueller, Karsten, Xu, Chenzi, Kabir, Poorya, 2023. EXIM’s Exit: The
Real Effects of Trade Financing by Export Credit Agencies. National Bureau of
Economics Research.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386816C. Xu and H. Yang

Melitz, Marc J., Redding, Stephen J., 2021. Trade and innovation. National bureau of

Rousseau, Peter L., Sylla, Richard, 2005. Emerging financial markets and early US

economic research.

growth. Explor. Econ. Hist. 42 (1), 1–26.

Mitchell, Wesley Clair, 1903. A History of the Greenbacks: With Special Reference to
the Economic Consequences of Their Issue: 1862-65. University of Chicago Press.
Moreira, Marcelo J., 2003. A conditional likelihood ratio test for structural models.

Rousseau, Peter L., Wachtel, Paul, 1998. Financial

intermediation and economic
performance: Historical evidence from five industrialized countries. J. Money Credit
Bank. 30 (4), 657–678.

Econometrica 71 (4), 1027–1048.

Paravisini, Daniel, Rappoport, Veronica, Schnabl, Philipp, 2023. Specialization in bank

lending: Evidence from exporting firms. J. Finance 78 (4), 2049–2085.

Paravisini, Daniel, Rappoport, Veronica, Schnabl, Philipp, Wolfenzon, Daniel, 2015.
Dissecting the effect of credit supply on trade: Evidence from matched credit-export
data. Rev. Econ. Stud. 82 (1), 333–359.

Sarkisyan, Sergey, 2023. Instant Payment Systems and Competition for Deposits. Jacobs

Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research Paper.
Schmookler, Jacob, 1954. The level of inventive activity. Rev. Econ. Stat. 183–190.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2012. Monetary policy as financial stability regulation. Q. J. Econ.

127 (1), 57–95.

Sylla, Richard, 1969. Federal policy, banking market structure, and capital mobilization

Petralia, Sergio, Balland, Pierre-Alexandre, Rigby, David, 2016. Unveiling the geography

in the United States, 1863–1913. J. Econ. Hist. 29 (4), 657–686.

of historical patents in the United States from 1836 to 1975. Sci. Data.

Preston, Howard H., 1920. The federal reserve banks’ system of par collections. J. Polit.

Econ. 28 (7), 565–590.

Redding, Stephen, Venables, Anthony J., 2004. Economic geography and international

inequality. J. Int. Econ. 62 (1), 53–82.

Rockoff, Hugh, 1975. The Free Banking Era: A Reconsideration. Arno Press, New York.
Rolnick, Arthur J., Weber, Warren E., 1982. Free banking, wildcat banking, and

Sylla, Richard, 1982. Monetary innovation in America. J. Econ. Hist. 42 (1), 21–30.
Ware, Lynn Willoughby, 1990. Cotton money: Antebellum currency conditions in the
Apalachicola/Chattahoochee River Valley. Georgia Hist. Q. 74 (2), 215–233.
Warner, John DeWitt, 1895. The currency famine of 1893. Sound Curr. 2 (6), 337–356.
White, Eugene N., 1982. The membership problem of the National Banking System.

Explor. Econ. Hist. 19 (2), 110–127.

White, Eugene N., 1998. Were banks special intermediaries in late nineteenth century

shinplasters. Fed. Reserve Bank Minneapolis Q. Rev..

America. Fed. Reserve Bank St. Louis Rev..

Romer, Christina D., Romer, David H., 1989. Does monetary policy matter? A new test
in the spirit of Friedman and Schwartz. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 4, 121–170.

Xu, Chenzi, 2022. Reshaping global trade: The immediate and long-run effects of bank

failures. Q. J. Econ. 137 (4), 2107–2161.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10386817