Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Regulatory arbitrage or random errors? Implications of race prediction
algorithms in fair lending analysis✩
Daniel L. Greenwald a, Sabrina T. Howell a,∗, Cangyuan Li a, Emmanuel Yimfor b
a Stern School of Business, New York University, United States of America
b Columbia Business School, Columbia University, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

When race is not directly observed, regulators and analysts commonly predict it using algorithms based on last
name and address. In small business lending—where regulators assess fair lending law compliance using the
Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding (BISG) algorithm—we document large prediction errors among Black
Americans. The errors bias measured racial disparities in loan approval rates downward by 43%, with greater
bias for traditional vs. fintech lenders. Regulation using self-identified race would increase lending to Black
borrowers, but also shift lending toward affluent areas because errors correlate with socioeconomics. Overall,
using race proxies in policymaking and research presents challenges.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/g547vfzybp/2

JEL classification:
G21
G23
G28
J15
C81

Keywords:
Racial disparities
Disparate impact analysis
Race-conscious policies
Race prediction
Small business lending
BISG

There are many high-stakes contexts in which regulators, firms,
administrators, and researchers do not directly observe race and instead
rely on proxies. One important setting is lending, where regulators use
race prediction algorithms to assess compliance with fair lending laws
for auto, personal, and small business loans, among other products.1
How accurate are these proxies? How might their prediction errors
influence the distribution of lending? And which borrowers and lenders
stand to benefit if the regulatory regime switches from proxies to more
direct data on race?

We study these questions in the setting of small business lend-
ing, where regulators are especially attentive to compliance with fair
lending laws because information asymmetry and financial constraints
make small business owners more vulnerable to discrimination.2 Small
business lenders do not collect and report applicant race, unlike home
mortgage lenders. This setting allows us to study an environment in
which the use of proxies is central to measuring regulatory compliance,
and enables us to contribute to an active policy debate about whether
or not to require small business lenders to collect self-identified race

✩

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this paper, and we are grateful for his comments. We thank seminar and conference participants at the University
of Michigan, MFA 2024, SITE 2023, FOM 2024, MIT Sloan, the U.S. Census Bureau Workshop on Advancing Research on Race, Ethnicity, and Inequality, and the
J.H. Carey 2024 conference. We would also like to thank Matt Denes, Heath Witzen, Michaela Pagel, and Scott Nelson, for their feedback. Howell and Yimfor’s
work on this project is funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, United States (G-2022-19451).

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: daniel.greenwald@stern.nyu.edu (D.L. Greenwald), sabrina.howell@nyu.edu (S.T. Howell), cl4220@stern.nyu.edu (C. Li),

emmanuel.yimfor@columbia.edu (E. Yimfor).

1 See, for example, prohibitions on discrimination in the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) (CFPB Methodology). Also, this list of products excludes

mortgages, for which self-identified race is collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act.

2 The U.S. Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures, which apply to five federal agencies, note that when it comes to commercial loans, ‘‘Although
ECOA prohibits discrimination in all commercial credit activities of a covered institution, the agencies recognize that small businesses (sole proprietorships,
partnerships, and small, closely-held corporations) may have less experience in borrowing. Small businesses may have fewer borrowing options, which may make
them more vulnerable to discrimination. Therefore, in implementing these procedures, examinations should generally be focused on small business credit’’.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103857
Received 30 August 2023; Received in revised form 22 April 2024; Accepted 23 April 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103857Availableonline10May20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.D.L. Greenwald et al.

data.3 We focus our analysis on Black Americans because they have his-
torically faced discrimination in credit markets—a key motivation for
fair lending laws—and because name-based race prediction algorithms
may be particularly problematic for them.4

In this context, we study the frequency of prediction errors, their
impact on underwriting policy both in aggregate and across lenders,
and how these impacts vary with socioeconomic characteristics of
borrowers. To obtain prediction errors when self-identified race is
not available, we construct a novel measure of race using images
(‘‘image-based race’’), which best aligns with visual perception of race.
Image-based race is relevant to many contexts where discrimination on
the basis of visual perception is a concern and could be applied in many
additional settings.

To build intuition and predictions for our empirical analysis, we
provide a simple model of lending under different regulatory environ-
ments. We assume that the average benefit lenders receive from serving
one racial group (‘‘Group B’’) is lower than the other (‘‘Group A’’), lead-
ing to lower approval rates for Group B in the absence of regulation.5
In our model, regulators aim to limit the disparity in approval rates
between the two groups. However, the regulator cannot observe actual
race and instead uses a noisy algorithm that predicts race. In order to
maintain compliance by reducing the measured gap between groups,
lenders tilt their approval policy for both racial groups to increase
lending to borrowers with a high algorithm-predicted probability of
being in Group B. However, among borrowers with a given algorithm-
predicted probability of being in Group B, the gap in approval rates
between actual members of Groups A and B remains just as large
as without regulation. As a result, algorithm-based regulation is only
partially effective at closing approval gaps across groups, which remain
higher than algorithm-based gaps perceived by the regulator. More-
over, algorithm-based regulation distorts lending within each racial
group across borrowers with different algorithm-based scores, which
may change the distribution of lending with respect to socioeconomic
covariates.

To empirically examine prediction errors and test these hypotheses,
we employ two sources of data on small business lending. The first is a
dataset of loan applications and funded loans between 2017 and 2019
from Lendio, an online loan marketplace for small businesses; these
data enable us to observe lender approval decisions in a real-world con-
text. The second data source is the Paycheck Protection Program, which
provided government-guaranteed, forgivable loans to small businesses
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Notably, while PPP data condition on
receiving a loan and represent an unusual underwriting environment
due to government guarantees, they include self-identified measures
of race in a real-world, non-mortgage lending context, allowing us
to measure various predicted race errors against this ‘‘gold standard’’
benchmark. While neither of these samples is perfectly representative
of U.S. small businesses or their lenders, they provide real-world lab-
oratories to study prediction errors from different measures of race.
We augment these sources with information on the socioeconomic
characteristics of each applicant’s ZIP code, as well as education data
sourced from their public LinkedIn profiles.

3 See here. More than 10 years ago, the Dodd-Frank Act directed the CFPB
to adopt regulations on this matter (referred to as ‘‘1071’’ due to the section
of the act), but due to stiff opposition from the banking community (see here
and here), they did not do so. In late March 2023, a final rule was issued
requiring data collection, but several months later it was indefinitely stayed
after a lawsuit from a banking association (see here and here).

4 Largely due the legacy of slavery, there is large overlap between sur-
names of Black and White Americans, reducing the statistical informativeness
of surnames. Name-based proxies typically perform better when identifying
individuals with Hispanic or Asian backgrounds.

5 We remain agnostic on the origin of these preferences, which could be the
result of taste-based discrimination, statistical discrimination, or unconscious
bias among loan officers.

For our main analysis, we construct two measures of race. The first
is the standard algorithmic prediction based on name and location
(Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding, or BISG), which is widely
used by regulators, researchers, and practitioners.

Our second measure is image-based race, which approximates how
an individual is usually perceived in the U.S. and is closer to self-
identified race than BISG (an assumption we test below).

To obtain an image of firm owners’ faces, we match them to
LinkedIn profiles, requiring that the firm in our loan data appears
on the LinkedIn profile. Next, we use an image classifier to obtain
facial embeddings (distinctive facial features) for each image. Using a
separate dataset of firm founder images for which we have race, we
train a random forest model to predict race (with 91% accuracy) using
facial embeddings and apply this model to our main datasets to classify
applicants as Black or non-Black. Finally, we conduct clerical reviews
of the output to mitigate the prediction errors from the model. After
the filters and matching, we observe image- and BISG-based race for
about 12,000 unique applicants in the Lendio data and 28,000 unique
borrowers in the PPP data.6 Because we obtained images by matching
names to a public source (LinkedIn), our procedure requires only basic
information on the applicant and firm as inputs, and it could be broadly
applied in other contexts.

For the purposes of our analysis, we denote an applicant who is
Black and correctly identified as such by BISG as a true positive and
denote an applicant who is non-Black and correctly identified as such
by BISG as a true negative. Conversely, we denote an applicant who is
Black but inaccurately classified by BISG as non-Black as a false negative
and an applicant who is non-Black but inaccurately classified by BISG
as Black as a false positive. We use a shorthand of calling either image-
based or self-identified Black race the ‘‘true’’ race to compare with
BISG-based race, but we view these measures as capturing different
dimensions of race and do not consider any measure to be the ‘‘truth’’
in a fundamental sense.

We first evaluate image- and BISG-based race measures against self-
identified race in the PPP data. We find that BISG has a high error
rate when classifying Black borrowers, with more than twice as many
errors (false positives or false negatives) as true positives. The image-
based measure performs better, with a correlation of 0.87 between
image-based and self-identified indicators for being Black, compared to
a correlation of just 0.54 for BISG and self-reported indicator for being
Black. This correlation is somewhat lower than analogous ones reported
in other studies, which usually revolve around 70%. We show that this
is a direct consequence of BISG being a biased measure of race in the
PPP sample because the share of Black individuals in the PPP sample
is lower than that in the population upon which BISG is calibrated.

We note that the imperfect correlation between image-based and
self-identified race does not necessarily reflect errors; image-based race
may be more relevant for discrimination when it differs from self-
identified race because it more accurately reflects how an individual
is perceived by others, which may differ from how they perceive
themselves.

To understand which borrowers stand to benefit from regulators
using a direct measure of race rather than a proxy, we explore how
these prediction errors vary with socioeconomic characteristics. We
find that the geographies where BISG tends to make false positive errors
(predicting people to be Black when they are not) are also areas with
particularly strong historical systematic disadvantage for Black borrow-
ers, including lower per capita income, more racial animus, higher
Black population shares, and less geographic segregation. Turning to
individual characteristics, we find that more educated individuals are
less likely to generate false positive errors. These patterns are reversed

6 The 12,000 applicants correspond to about 50,000 applications since
Lendio sends applications to multiple lenders, and firms also sometimes apply
on multiple occasions.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038572D.L. Greenwald et al.

for false negatives. The results are robust to using self-identified race
as ‘‘true’’ race (only available in the PPP sample), as well as across the
PPP and Lendio samples using image-based race as ‘‘true’’ race.

Having established the presence of large prediction errors using
BISG, we next analyze the impact of these errors on measured racial
disparities in approvals in our Lendio data. Our analysis is motivated
by the process for conducting fair lending evaluations across a range of
federal U.S. regulators, which begins by assessing whether the lender
approves a similar share of applicants in protected groups as in the
majority group.7 Our theory predicts that when regulators evaluate
compliance using BISG, lenders are incentivized to prioritize non-
Black borrowers with high BISG scores (false positives) over Black
borrowers with low BISG scores (false negatives), which biases the
regulator-measured approval gap down relative to the true one.

Testing this hypothesis in the data, we find that the gap in approval
rates between non-Black and Black applicants is 1.3pp when classifying
applicants using BISG, but is nearly twice as large (2.3pp) when clas-
sifying applicants using our image-based measure. This implies that a
regulator who can only observe the BISG-based measure would sub-
stantially underestimate racial disparities. In regressions, we find that
this difference in the predictive power of BISG-based race and image-
based race on approvals is robust to various specifications and controls.
Our empirical analysis is thus consistent with lenders responding to
regulatory incentives as predicted by theory, creating an illusion of
better compliance with fair lending laws, and reducing the ability of
regulation to narrow true approval gaps between racial groups.

The above results highlight average approval gaps in our overall
sample. Since regulators focus on lender-level evidence of discrim-
ination, we construct a lender-level measure for the difference in
approval rates using image-based race vs. BISG-based race, which we
call 𝛥Share Black Appr . When this difference is positive, the lender is serving
the actual (image-based) Black population at a higher rate than they
appear to be with BISG; that is, the lender is serving more Black
borrowers classified as non-Black by BISG (false negatives). Since there
is a positive correlation between false negatives and high socioeco-
nomic status (e.g., for a Black borrower with a racially ambiguous
last name living in a ‘‘White’’ neighborhood), a lender that serves
more advantaged Black borrowers will have a higher difference, po-
tentially representing a response to ‘‘cream-skimming’’ incentives. In
contrast, when 𝛥Share Black Appr is more negative, the lender appears more
consistent with fair lending laws than they actually are, potentially
representing a response to compliance incentives. We find substan-
tial variation across lenders, suggesting that errors in predicting the
race of individual borrowers translate into large errors in evaluating
compliance at the lender level.

We also show that BISG errors could be influential in determining
relative rankings and the identities of lenders most likely to face inves-
tigation. Suppose regulators use raw approval rate gaps to rank lenders
according to their Black/non-Black approval gaps and then investigate
the lenders with the largest gap. How often would the composition
of high-gap lenders change based on how race is measured? As one
example, if we consider the 10% of lenders with the highest Black/non-
Black approval gaps, 40% of them would change their identity if we
measured the gap using image-based race rather than BISG-implied
race.

In both Lendio and PPP data (where we use loan shares to Black
borrowers rather than approval shares), we find that 𝛥Share Black Appr is
more negative for banks and other conventional lenders that typically

7 The U.S. Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures, which apply
to five federal agencies including the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation, detail how approval rates should be used by
fair lending examiners. Note that in the absence of information about risk, the
expectation is not zero difference. However, a wider difference merits a closer
investigation by the regulator.

rely on soft information for underwriting (Petersen and Rajan, 1994;
Berger and Black, 2011), while it is more positive for fintechs, which
are more automated and arms-length (Balyuk et al., 2020; Howell
et al., 2024). There are many possible reasons for this difference,
but one interpretation is that fintechs—which tend to be more lightly
regulated—have weaker incentives to improve perceived compliance
using BISG-based measures. These results imply that moving from
measures based on BISG to measures based on self-identified race for
regulation would have impacts that vary widely across both lenders and
lender types, with conventional lenders being particularly affected.

Last, we estimate a counterfactual in which regulators move from
evaluating compliance with fair lending laws using BISG-based race
to using actual race (proxied here by image-based race). Our analysis
reveals that this policy change would increase the share of loans to
borrowers who are actually Black, reducing discrimination based on
skin color. However, within the population of Black borrowers, this
shift would also reallocate loans toward areas with higher incomes,
fewer Black households, and higher levels of education. Thus, it could
inadvertently increase within-race or geographic inequality in lending,
even though it reduces between-race inequality by increasing lending
to actual Black borrowers.

There are many settings besides lending to which our results are rel-
evant. For example, university admissions officers may seek to evaluate
the composition of the incoming class without collecting race data after
the 2022 Supreme Court ruling in Students for Fair Admission. Another
example is that in the absence of data on race for healthcare patients,
healthcare plans and administrators use racial prediction algorithms to
assess differences across groups in disease incidence and in the quality
of care (Fremont et al., 2016). Economists studying issues of race also
often use prediction algorithms, and can take steps to evaluate whether
algorithmic biases might affect their findings.8

Related literature. This paper contributes to several strands of litera-
ture. First, we build on research about racial disparities in access to
financial services, which has mostly focused on residential mortgages
and consumer credit markets (Tootell, 1996; Bayer et al., 2018; Begley
and Purnanandam, 2021; Bhutta and Hizmo, 2021; Blattner and Nelson,
2021; Dobbie et al., 2021; Giacoletti et al., 2021). Also related is work
on the role of different lenders, especially the role of emerging fintech
firms and traditional banks, in serving minority groups and underserved
populations (Buchak et al., 2018; Tang, 2019; Fuster et al., 2019; Berg
et al., 2020; D’Acunto et al., 2020; Erel and Liebersohn, 2020; Bartlett
et al., 2022). Other work studies how removing names from applica-
tions for employment or loans affects outcomes (Bartik and Nelson,
2024; Kabir and Ruan, 2023). More broadly, we join the literature on
bias against Black Americans across a wide range of settings, includ-
ing Knowles et al. (2001), Anwar and Fang (2006), Charles and Guryan
(2008), Price and Wolfers (2010), and Arnold et al. (2018). To our
knowledge, this paper is the first to examine how disparities in serving
different groups—in our case, disparities across lenders—depends on
the way race is measured.

We join a small literature on racial disparities in entrepreneurship
and small business finance specifically. Blanchflower et al. (2003) find
racial differences in access to small business credit, while (Robb and
Robinson, 2018) do not find such differences. Other work on the role of
race in small business lending includes Fairlie and Robb (2007), Asiedu
et al. (2012), Bellucci et al. (2013), and Fairlie et al. (2022). A recent
literature has focused specifically on racial disparities in the PPP (Erel
and Liebersohn, 2020; Chernenko and Scharfstein, 2021; Fairlie and
Fossen, 2021; Howell et al., 2024). To our knowledge, this project is
the first effort to focus explicitly on compliance with fair lending laws
in small business finance.

8 Examples include Pool et al. (2015), Dimmock et al. (2018), Ambrose
et al. (2021), Egan et al. (2022), Frame et al. (2022), and Howell et al. (2024).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038573D.L. Greenwald et al.

Finally, we contribute to work on the methodologies used in identi-
fying race. We create a measure of race based on images and compare
its effectiveness to other established approaches, using self-identified
race as a benchmark. This is relevant to research and policy that require
measures of race, especially contexts where self-identified data are
unavailable (Pool et al., 2015; Dimmock et al., 2018; Ambrose et al.,
2021; Jiang et al., 2021; Egan et al., 2022; Frame et al., 2022). We
also join a new literature with image-based analysis; for example, Athey
et al. (2022) show that microloan applicants who smile in their online
profile photograph are more successful in obtaining credit. Our results
provide guidance on best practices for researchers and regulators,
such as the need to address bias arising from the correlation between
socioeconomic characteristics and errors in proxies for race.

Overview. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1
presents the algorithmic, image-based, and self-reported measures of
race we will use in our analysis. Section 2 constructs a simple model to
show how the measure used by regulators influences lending. Section 3
documents our data sources. Section 4 compares our measures of race
to construct classification errors. Section 5 shows that these errors
are not random but vary with socioeconomic characteristics. Section 6
shows how these errors influence measured approval rates by race.
Section 7 studies the link between prediction errors and approval by
lender. Section 8 presents our empirical counterfactual exercise from a
switch to self-reported race regulation. Section 9 concludes.

1. Measures of race

This section describes the measures of race we use, highlighting
their strengths and limitations and detailing our novel methodology for
inferring race based on an individual’s image. Importantly, we do not
believe there is a single absolute truth when it comes to measuring race,
and thus the context of how race is used in a particular decision-making
or research process should inform which measure is best suited to the
application.

Self-identified race. Self-identified race refers to the race that an in-
dividual reports for themselves. Self-identified race and ethnicity for
loan applicants are typically collected for home mortgages and used for
assessing compliance with fair lending laws in mortgage underwriting.
While self-identified race can be seen as the ‘‘gold standard’’ in terms
of minimizing measurement error, we note that an individual’s self-
identified race may differ from how others perceive them—a crucial
distinction as many economic questions revolve around whether agents
are treated differently because they are perceived to be of a particular
race.

Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding (BISG). BISG is the standard
method used by regulators to predict race in the absence of data on
self-identified race. BISG combines two measures of race based on
geography and surnames. The geography-based measure assigns the
probability of an individual’s race based on the racial composition of
the specific geography. The geography is most often a ZIP code, but
can be a census block, census tract, county, or state. The surname-based
measure uses the frequency distribution of names within a population
to predict race. However, this method poses a practical challenge as
many Black Americans have racially ambiguous surnames. For exam-
ple, while the most common last names among Black people—Williams,
Johnson, Smith, Jones, Brown, Jackson, Davis, Thomas, Harris, and
Robinson—account for approximately 12% of all Black Americans,
people identified as Black in the U.S. census comprise a minority of
individuals with these names, except in one case (53% of people with
the name Jackson).9

To generate BISG probabilities, we first identify the owner’s name
and their location (discussed in Section 3), and then employ the Surgeo

9 See the 2010 Decennial Census.

library in Python (see Appendix B for details). The algorithm’s output
are probabilities that an individual is Hispanic, White, Black, Asian,
Pacific Islander/Alaska Native, or Multiracial. We transform this output
by summing the probabilities that the applicant is non-Black and retain-
ing two columns, one for the probability that the applicant is Black and
the other for the probability that the applicant is non-Black. We also use
the probabilities to randomly assign an applicant as Black or non-Black
(BISG𝑅𝐴𝑁𝐷).10 For instance, if an applicant has a 20 percent probability
of being Black, then there is a 20 percent chance that we will assign
them the Black label. For analyses with individual-level data, we use
BISG𝑅𝐴𝑁𝐷. For lender-level analysis, we use the raw probability of
being Black as determined by the BISG algorithm.

Economists studying race sometimes use Bayesian Improved First-
name and Surname Geocoding (BIFSG), which also employs the first
name (e.g., Pool et al., 2015; Dimmock et al., 2018; Ambrose et al.,
2021; Egan et al., 2022; Frame et al., 2022). While the BISG method
is defined when an individual has a surname that is shared by more
than 100 or more people (the 2010 U.S. Census surname database
contains race and ethnicity percentages of 151,671 unique surnames
covering 89.9% of U.S. population), the BIFSG method is only defined
for people with common first names. The most common source has just
4250 first names.11 In fact, of the most common distinctive Black names
in Fryer and Levitt (2004)—Deshawn, Tyrone, Reginald, Shanice, Pre-
cious, Kiara, and Deja—only two out of seven are among the candidate
names, meaning that the others have no BIFSG prediction. Our main
analysis employs BISG to avoid the restriction to common first names.

Image-based race.
Image-based race is inferred from an individual’s
appearance. We obtain images by matching individuals in our data to
LinkedIn and then downloading their complete LinkedIn profiles.12 To
mitigate errors from associating an image with the wrong applicant, we
retain only those observations where the company name listed on the
applicant’s LinkedIn profile matches the borrowing company’s name on
the application, and the employment start date precedes the application
date.

We use a pretrained image classifier to obtain facial embeddings,
which are loadings of an image on different facial attributes. Specifi-
cally, we use the VGG-Face classifier, which is wrapped in the DeepFace
Python package developed by Serengil and Ozpinar (2020). With these
embeddings, we train a random forest model on a dataset consisting of
around 170,000 images of founders of venture-backed startups (Cook
et al., 2022). The model achieved 91% accuracy in a hold-out sample.13
We then apply the model to the facial embeddings in our sample to
obtain a preliminary classification. It is worth noting that automated
face recognition is not infallible and can result in false positives and

10 We set a seed for this random assignment to ensure replicability.
11 See here.
12 When an image is not available on LinkedIn, we also draw from other

websites such as Facebook and Twitter.

13 Given that about 3 percent of founders in venture-backed startups are
Black, a model predicting that ‘‘all founders of venture-backed startups are
white’’ would be approximately 97% accurate. However, in the model we
implemented, such a prediction would be correct less than 50% of the time.
Why? To address the under-representation of Black founders in our dataset, we
sampled with replacement. This ensures that our training data has a balanced
representation of Black and non-Black founders. For example, suppose we
had images of 100 founders with 96 being non-Black and 4 being Black, we
would re-sample the images of the Black founders. During this re-sampling,
we introduced minor modifications to each image, such as cropping the edges
or adjusting the size, so that the resulting images, while similar, were not
identical. Consequently, in this hypothetical example we would have a training
dataset with 192 images (96 X 2), where half were of Black founders. While
the model’s initial classification aids in expediting the review process, it is
essential to note that we put all the images through a manual verification
process. The model serves to facilitate this procedure rather than determining
the ultimate outcome.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038574D.L. Greenwald et al.

false negatives, particularly for Black applicants photographed in very
bright lighting or White applicants photographed in settings with very
little lighting.14 To address such potential errors, we conducted manual
reviews of all images using the applicant’s LinkedIn profile information
when the image alone proved insufficient for classification. We classify
each applicant as either Black or non-Black.

2. Theory

This section offers a simple model to fix ideas about how different
measures of race could systematically bias disparate impact assessments
in lending, which in turn could create incentives to distort lending in
order to game the compliance system. We first present the structure
and equilibrium of the model under various regulatory assumptions,
then provide a simple numerical example to display its properties.

Lending technology. Consider a lender who lends to two groups, 𝐴 and
𝐵. The value of lending to an individual 𝑖 of type 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵} is assumed
to be

𝑣𝑖,𝑗 = 𝜇𝑗 − 𝜀𝑖.

(1)

The term 𝜇𝑗 represents a group-specific benefit to the lender of making
a loan to an individual of Group 𝑗, which could represent actual average
differences in profitability, confounds between race and other variables
that influence the value of lending, or a subjective preference for
lending to individuals of a certain race. We order 𝐴 and 𝐵 so that
𝜇𝐴 > 𝜇𝐵, implying that without regulation lenders would provide fewer
loans to members of Group 𝐵. The term 𝜀𝑖 is an idiosyncratic type,
which creates variation in the cost of lending to different borrowers
within a group.

To motivate the linear probability regressions we will run later,
we assume the uniform distribution 𝜀𝑖 ∼ 𝑈 [0, 1], where we note that
the choice to bound the support between 0 and 1 is without loss of
generality, as long as we rescale 𝜇𝑗 accordingly (see Appendix D.2).
This parameterization implies the CDF 𝐹𝜀(𝜀𝑖) = 𝜀𝑖, and the PDF 𝑓𝜀(𝜀𝑖) =
1 on the support [0, 1].

No regulation equilibrium.
It is clear from Eq. (1) that the optimal policy
for the lender is to approve loans to all borrowers of Group 𝑗 with
𝜀 < ̄𝜀𝑗 , for some threshold value ̄𝜀𝑗 . In the absence of a regulatory
constraint, the lender therefore chooses { ̄𝜀𝐴, ̄𝜀𝐵} to maximize

∑

𝑉 =

𝑗∈{𝐴,𝐵}

𝑠𝑗 ∫

̄𝜀𝑗 (𝜇𝑗 − 𝜀) 𝑑𝐹𝜀(𝜀),

(2)

where 𝑠𝑗 is the share of the population in Group 𝑗. The first order
condition for this problem is

̄𝜀𝑁𝑅
𝑗 = 𝜇𝑗 ,

(3)

where the superscript 𝑁𝑅 stands for ‘‘no regulation’’. Assuming that
𝜇𝐴 > 𝜇𝐵, this implies that ̄𝜀𝐴 > ̄𝜀𝐵 and therefore that the probability
of being approved, equal to 𝐹𝜀( ̄𝜀𝑗 ), is higher for Group A than Group
B. Formally, if we define 𝜋𝑁𝑅
to be the probability of approval for
individual 𝑖 under no regulation, and apply our parametric assumption
𝜀𝑖 ∼ 𝑈 [0, 1], we obtain

𝑖

Regulatory constraint on actual race. Depending on the drivers of these
disparities in lending, a regulator may wish to require lenders to
allocate credit more equally across groups. We first consider the case
where the regulator can observe the actual group (race) to which each
applicant belongs and sets a constraint that the share of loans approved
for members of Group 𝐵 can be lower than that of Group 𝐴 by no more
than some amount 𝜅 ≥ 0:

𝐹𝜀( ̄𝜀𝐴) − 𝐹𝜀( ̄𝜀𝐵) ≤ 𝜅.

(5)

The lender’s problem now is to maximize (2) subject to (5). The optimal
policy is to approve loans for borrowers of type 𝑗 with 𝜀𝑖,𝑗 < ̄𝜀𝐴𝑅
, where

𝑗

̄𝜀𝐴𝑅
𝐴 = 𝜇𝐴 −

̄𝜀𝐴𝑅
𝐵 = 𝜇𝐵 +

𝜆𝐴𝑅
𝑠𝐴
𝜆𝐴𝑅
𝑠𝐵

,

.

(6)

(7)

Where 𝜆𝐴𝑅 is the multiplier on constraint (5) and the superscript 𝐴𝑅
stands for ‘‘actual race’’. These expressions nest (2) if 𝜆𝐴𝑅 = 0, which
occurs when the regulatory constraint is slack. When the constraint
binds (𝜆𝐴𝑅 > 0), the effect is to lower the cutoff for Group A (reducing
approvals) and to raise the cutoff for Group B (increasing approvals).
The approval rate for individual 𝑖 is

𝜋𝐴𝑅
𝑖 =

(

𝜇𝐴 −

)

+

𝜆𝐴𝑅
𝑠𝐴

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
const

⎡
⎢
(𝜇𝐵 − 𝜇𝐴)
⎢
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
⎢
⎣
<0

+ 𝜆𝐴𝑅(𝑠−1

⎤
⎥
𝐴 + 𝑠−1
𝐵 )
⎥
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎥
⎦
>0

𝐵𝑖.

(8)

Relative to (4), the regulation increases the probability of approval for
applicants in Group B, and decreases the probability of approval for
applicants in Group A.

Regulatory constraint on predicted race. We now consider the most em-
pirically realistic case, in which regulators cannot observe actual race,
but instead use a predictive algorithm (BISG). In this case, we assume
that the lender can either still observe actual race, or some covariates
that influence 𝜇𝑗 and are correlated with race but not captured by BISG,
such as income or education.

For this scenario, the optimal policy turns out to be to approve all
borrowers with 𝜀 < ̄𝜀𝑗 (𝑞) for some thresholds ̄𝜀𝑗 (𝑞) that depend on
Group 𝑗 and each borrower’s BISG-predicted probability of being in
Group B, denoted 𝑞. Since regulators use BISG to predict the amount of
approved loans 𝐿𝑗 to Group 𝑗, they estimate

∑

̂𝐿𝐴 =

̂𝐿𝐵 =

𝑗∈{𝐴,𝐵}
∑

𝑗∈{𝐴,𝐵}

𝑠𝑗 ∫ (1 − 𝑞)𝐹𝜀( ̄𝜀𝑗 (𝑞)) 𝑑𝐹𝑞,𝑗 (𝑞),

𝑠𝑗 ∫ 𝑞𝐹𝜀( ̄𝜀𝑗 (𝑞)) 𝑑𝐹𝑞,𝑗 (𝑞),

(9)

(10)

where 𝐹𝑞,𝑗 is the CDF of the distribution of 𝑞 for Group 𝑗, and the hats
indicate that these are the BISG-predicted, rather than actual, values.
The lender now requires that the BISG-predicted share of loans
approved for members of Group 𝐵 can be lower than that of Group
𝐴 by no more than some amount 𝜅 ≥ 0. Since the estimated approval
rate for Group 𝑗 using BISG probabilities is ̂𝐿𝑗 ∕𝑠𝑗 , this constraint is

𝜋𝑁𝑅
𝑖

= 𝜇𝐴 + (𝜇𝐵 − 𝜇𝐴)
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
<0

𝐵𝑖,

where, in a slight abuse of notation, 𝐵𝑖 is an indicator for being in
Group B.

(4)

̂𝐿𝐴
𝑠𝐴

−

̂𝐿𝐵
𝑠𝐵

≤ 𝜅,

which we show in Appendix D.1 can be written as
]

𝐹𝜀( ̄𝜀𝑗 (𝑞)) 𝑑𝐹𝑞,𝑗 (𝑞) ≤ 𝜅.

∑

𝑠𝑗 ∫

𝑗∈{𝐴,𝐵}

[ 1 − 𝑞
𝑠𝐴

−

𝑞
𝑠𝐵

14 At this stage, we also screen out typically South Asian names using a
name classifier, as South Asians are often mistakenly classified by the facial
recognition software as Black.

The lender now maximizes

∑

𝑉 =

𝑗∈{𝐴,𝐵}

𝑠𝑗 ∫ ∫

̄𝜀𝑗 (𝑞)

(𝜇𝑗 − 𝜀) 𝑑𝐹𝜀(𝜀) 𝑑𝐹𝑞,𝑗

(11)

(12)

(13)

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038575D.L. Greenwald et al.

subject to (12). The optimal policy is to approve loans for borrowers of
Group 𝑗 and BISG probability 𝑞 if 𝜀𝑖,𝑗 < ̄𝜀𝑃 𝑅

(𝑞) for

𝑗

̄𝜀𝑃 𝑅
𝑗

(𝑞) = 𝜇𝑗 + 𝜆𝑃 𝑅

]

[ 𝑞
𝑠𝐵

−

1 − 𝑞
𝑠𝐴

(14)

where the superscript 𝑃 𝑅 stands for ‘‘predicted race’’. The intuition
for (14) is that the regulator predicts that this applicant is in Group B
with probability 𝑞, which loosens the constraint, but is in Group A with
probability 1−𝑞, which tightens the constraint. In the case that the BISG
algorithm is perfect, and 𝑞 is always zero or one, then (14) becomes (6)
and (7) for members of Groups A and B, respectively, nesting our earlier
results.

Computing the probability of approval, we obtain

𝜋𝑃 𝑅
𝑖 =

(

𝜇𝐴 −

)

𝜆𝑃 𝑅
𝑠𝐴

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
const

+ (𝜇𝐵 − 𝜇𝐴
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
<0

)𝐵𝑖 + 𝜆𝑃 𝑅 (𝑠−1

𝐵 + 𝑠−1
𝐴
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
>0

)

𝑞𝑖.

(15)

Importantly, the loading on 𝐵𝑖 is exactly the same as in the no regula-
tion equilibrium (Eq. (4)), meaning that the gap between groups A and
B remains unchanged conditional on 𝑞. Intuitively, this holds because
lenders only receive credit for fair lending based on 𝑞, rather than the
actual group 𝑗.

The effect on approvals of moving from regulation based on pre-
dicted (BISG) race to regulation based on actual (self-identified) race is
the difference between (8) and (15), which is equal to

𝑖 − 𝜋𝑃 𝑅
𝜋𝐴𝑅

𝑖 =

)

(

𝜆𝑃 𝑅 − 𝜆𝐴𝑅
𝑠𝐴
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
const

+ 𝜆𝐴𝑅(𝑠−1

𝐴 + 𝑠−1
𝐵 )𝐵𝑖
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loading on actual race

− 𝜆𝑃 𝑅 (𝑠−1

) 𝑞𝑖
𝐵 + 𝑠−1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loading on predicted race

𝐴

. (16)

Eq. (16) shows that such a change in policy would reduce the coef-
ficient on 𝑞 (the BISG probability of Group B) in an approval rate
regression, while increasing the coefficient on the indicator for actually
being in Group B. We will use this equation to motivate our empirical
design in Section 8.

Numerical example. To close the theory section, we provide a numerical
example to illustrate the mechanisms at work. We first parameterize the
model. We map Group A to non-Black borrowers and Group B to Black
borrowers. Accordingly, we set the population shares of Group A and
Group B to 83.96% and 16.04% respectively, matching the image-based
shares of loan applications by non-Black and Black borrowers in our
Lendio data (which are introduced in detail below in Section 3). For the
distributions 𝐹𝑞,𝑗 , we choose beta distributions, which are appropriate
for distributions of probabilities 𝑞 as they are bounded between 0 and
1. Beta distributions are parameterized by two shape parameters: 𝛼 and
𝛽. For Groups A (non-Black) and B (Black), we choose these parameters
to match the mean and variance of the BISG probabilities for these
groups, where we assign applicants to groups based on our image-
based measure of race. The resulting beta distributions fit the empirical
distributions well, as shown in Fig. 1.

To calibrate the 𝜇 parameters, we set up a predicted race equi-
librium that corresponds as closely as possible to the data. Since the
approval rate gap constraint in the model is binding in the predicted
race equilibrium, we set 𝜅 = 1.32% so that we exactly reproduce the
approval rate gap in the data between non-Black and Black applicants
as predicted by BISG (8.33% for BISG non-Black applicants, 7.01% for
BISG Black applicants). We then set 𝜇𝐴 = 9.02% and 𝜇𝐵 = 4.58% so that
the approval rates by actual race in this predicted race equilibrium ex-
actly match the approval rates by image-based race in the data (8.53%
for image non-Black applicants, 6.20% for image Black applicants).15

With the model calibrated, from this point on we consider a policy
experiment that sets 𝜅 = 0 to simulate hypothetical regulation that aims

15 These approval shares differ from 𝜇𝐴 and 𝜇𝐵 because of the lender’s
incentives to reduce the regulator’s perceived approval gap according to BISG.

Fig. 1. BISG Densities by actual race.
Note: The figures above display the empirical and fitted distributions of the probability
of being Black according to the BISG algorithm. Panels (A) and (B) display borrowers
identified to be non-Black and Black, respectively by our image-based measure. For
each group, blue bars display our data’s empirical distribution in one-percent bins,
while the red dashed line displays the fitted beta distribution used by the model. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article.)

to equalize the actual or predicted approval rates of the two groups. The
approval rates implied by the model can be seen in Fig. 2. The dashed
lines show the approval rates under the no regulation scenario (𝜋𝑁𝑅).
These lines are perfectly flat due to our assumption (made to better
illustrate the mechanism) that the fundamental value of lending to a
borrower does not depend directly on 𝑞 conditional on a borrower’s
actual Group 𝑗 (an assumption we relax in Appendix E, see below). In
this case, the approval rate for Group B is 4.58%, substantially lower
than the approval rate of 9.02% for Group A. However, a regulator
using BISG would predict that the approval rates are 5.32% for Group
B vs. 8.88% for Group A, meaning that the actual gap is 24.8% larger
than the BISG-implied one. This downward bias when measuring the
approval gap using BISG occurs even though 𝑞 is close to unbiased
and approval policies do not depend on BISG conditional on actual
race. Instead, the BISG-based classification overpredicts the approval
rate for Group B because the false positive borrowers mistakenly added

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038576D.L. Greenwald et al.

Fig. 2. Numerical example: Lender approval policy.
Note: This figure displays the model’s approval rates. The blue dashed line labeled 𝜋𝑁𝑅
displays the approval rate for Group A under the no regulation equilibrium, while the
blue solid line labeled 𝜋𝑃 𝑅
𝐴 displays the approval rate for Group A under the predicted
race regulation equilibrium. The orange dashed line labeled 𝜋𝑁𝑅
and orange solid
line labeled 𝜋𝑃 𝑅
display the same objects for Group B. The gray dashed line labeled
𝜋𝐴𝑅
𝐴 = 𝜋𝐴𝑅
𝐵 displays the approval rate for both Groups A and B under the actual race
equilibrium, as these turn out to be identical in this case. (For interpretation of the
references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.)

𝐴

𝐵

𝐵

to Group B have a much higher approval rate than the false negative
borrowers mistakenly removed from Group B, even though these groups
are similar in size.

From this baseline, we can turn to the solid lines, which show the
equilibrium under regulation using predicted race (𝜋𝑃 𝑅). In this case,
the approval rates for both groups now show a strong upward tilt with
respect to 𝑞. Under the new policy, lending to high-𝑞 borrowers (of
either group) helps the lender meet its regulatory constraint, increasing
the value of loans to these borrowers and generating this slope. At
the same time, the gap between approval rates for the two groups
conditional on 𝑞 is unchanged from the no regulation baseline.

Under the predicted race policy, the regulator (using BISG to predict
race) believes that the gap in approval rates is completely eliminated,
with both groups being approved at rate 8.07%. However, the approval
gap using actual race is not eliminated, with approval rates for Group
A and B of 8.24% and 7.15%, respectively. Thus, the Predicted Race
policy is only partially effective, leaving 24.6% of the initial 4.44pp
gap from the no regulation equilibrium unclosed. To the extent that the
predicted race regulation manages to be effective, it does so despite the
difference between the two groups’ approval rates (the vertical distance
between the two solid lines in Fig. 2) remaining exactly the same as in

the no regulation equilibrium conditional on 𝑞 (equal to 𝜇𝐴 − 𝜇𝐵 at
all points). Instead, this occurs because the densities of 𝑞 are not the
same across groups, with the 𝑞 distribution for Group B having much
more mass to the right (where approval rates are elevated compared to
the no regulation baseline) than to the left (where approval rates are
depressed compared to the no regulation baseline), while the Group A
distribution has much more mass in the low-𝑞 region to the left. As a
result, Group B sees a greater increase in approvals despite no change
in the gap between 𝜋𝑃 𝑅

𝐵 conditional on 𝑞.

𝐴 and 𝜋𝑃 𝑅

Third, we consider a regulatory regime in which the lender requires
the true approval rates (based on actual race) to be the same across
groups. The approval rates under this equilibrium (𝜋𝐴𝑅) are identical
across groups and are plotted as a single gray dotted line in Fig. 2.
As discussed above, this change of regime increases the loading of
approval rate on an indicator for being in Group B, shown by the large
average shift upward of the orange line and average shift downward
of the blue line. However, this change also reduces the loading of
approval rates on 𝑞, which removes the positive slope in the predicted
race equilibrium and returns the slope of the approval rate with respect
to 𝑞 to zero.

We summarize the differences between these regulatory regimes in
Fig. 3, which shows the approval rates by actual and BISG-predicted
group. The figure shows that the predicted race policy has outcomes
very similar to the actual race policy for both true positive and true
negative applicants—borrowers in Groups B and A, respectively, who
are correctly classified as such by BISG. In particular, approval rates
in the predicted race equilibrium are slightly higher than in the actual
race equilibrium for true positive borrowers and slightly lower than
in the actual race equilibrium for true negative borrowers. However,
the two policies deviate widely for borrowers incorrectly classified by
BISG. In particular, the predicted race equilibrium exhibits approval
rates for false positive applicants well above those of the actual race
equilibrium. This occurs because lenders receive regulatory credit for
lending to these applicants in the predicted race equilibrium (since the
regulator believes they are in Group B, even though they are actually
in Group A) but do not in the actual race equilibrium where they are
known by the regulator to be in Group A. Similarly, lending to false
negative applicants (in Group B but predicted to be in Group A) is
markedly lower in the predicted race equilibrium, since lenders do not
receive regulatory credit for these approvals.

In summary, BISG-based regulation can be partially successful at
increasing lending to Group B since BISG is a somewhat informative
signal, so that Group B on average has higher values for 𝑞. However,
because the predicted race regulation incentivizes lending more to false
positive applicants and less to false negative applicants, it does not
completely close the approval rate gap between groups. Thus, moving
to an actual race regime based on self-identified race would reduce
the true between-race approval gap. To the extent that actual race and
BISG-predicted race (encoded in 𝑞 above) covary differently with other
socioeconomic variables (i.e., false negative and true positive borrow-
ers differ systematically), moving to actual race regulation may also
influence these socioeconomic measures among approved borrowers.

Extension: Correlation between BISG and fundamentals.
In our bench-
mark model, the BISG-predicted race probabilities embedded in 𝑞 have
no influence on lending except through the regulatory constraint (12).
In Appendix E, we extend the model to allow for correlation between
BISG and fundamentals.

3. Data sources

We use two primary sources of data on applicants and borrowers
for small business loans. In this section, we describe them as well as
the supplementary sources we draw from.

Lendio loan applications. We use basic data on loan applications and
funded loans from Lendio, an online loan marketplace for small

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038577D.L. Greenwald et al.

Fig. 3. Model numerical example: Approvals by classification type.
Note: This figure reports approval rates by classification group in the model’s numerical example. Each panel displays the approval rates for a given classification of applicants
over all three computed equilibria: no regulation, actual race, and predicted race. For the panel classifications, ‘‘True Positive’’ refers to applicants in Group B correctly classified
by BISG to be in Group B, ‘‘False Positive’’ refers to applicants in Group A falsely classified by BISG to be in Group B, ‘‘False Negative’’ refers to applicants in Group B falsely
classified by BISG to be in Group A, and ‘‘True Negative’’ refers to applicants in Group A correctly classified by BISG to be in Group A. For organization, the top and bottom rows
of the figure correspond to applicants in Groups B and A, respectively, while the left and right columns correspond to applicants predicted by BISG as being in Groups B and A,
respectively.

businesses. These data offer a rare chance to observe lenders’ approval
decisions in a real-world market context. Firms submit a single applica-
tion, and Lendio forwards that application to one or more lenders on its
platform. Those lenders decide whether to make offers to the borrower,
who then decides whether to take up the loan. We employ Lendio data
from 2017–2019. We identify the applicant as the primary contact on
the loan application.16

The raw Lendio dataset has applications from 160,942 unique firms.
Of these, the BISG algorithm produces a race prediction for 139,759.
We obtain image-based race for 11,190. This relatively small number
reflects our strict approach to minimize false positives. We require
that: (i) the borrowing company’s name corresponds with at least one
experience entry on the applicant’s LinkedIn profile; (ii) the applicant
must have commenced their tenure at the company prior to the ap-
plication date; and (iii) the applicant must not have terminated their
tenure at the company before the application date. While the small
sample in our context could pose a challenge for applications such as

regulatory supervision, image-based race may be useful when images
that are certain to correspond to the individual are more accessible
for a representative population. Our approach allows us to study the
limitations of using proxies for race as substitutes for self-identified
race. Summary statistics about the data used in analysis are in Table 1.
Here and below, we consider an ‘‘application’’ to be an instance in
which Lendio forwards a loan application to a specific lender. Lendio
on average sends an application to about four lenders. Focusing on the
application level in Panel A, the average (median) application seeks
just over $100,000 ($50,000) in funding, but the approved amounts
are much lower, at around $52,000 ($26,000). The average approval
rate is 8.2%.

Unfortunately, we do not directly observe whether a loan was not
funded because the lender formally rejected the application or made
an offer that was not taken up. However, based on our understanding
of Lendio’s process, we are able to compute an implied measure of
approval or rejection.17 The key is that Lendio will typically only
forward an application to an additional lender when it is rejected. Thus,

16 To avoid spurious results from small samples, we exclude lenders who
received 10 or fewer applications. This allows us to construct more reliable
lender-specific approval probabilities.

17 We thank the Lendio staff, including Katherine Chandler and Brock Blake,

for their helpful insights.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038578D.L. Greenwald et al.

Table 1
Loan application and lender summary statistics (Lendio).

Panel A: Application-Level Data

N

Mean

Median

SD

Loan Approval:
Amount Sought
Amount Funded
Approved
Rejected

Share Lender Type:
Bank
Fintech
Credit Union/CDFI
MDI
Factoring/MCA/CC

47,504
3,875
47,504
47,504

47,504
47,504
47,504
47,504
47,504

104,014
52,031
0.082
0.918

0.243
0.486
0.137
0.001
0.134

Panel B: Unique Applicant-Level Data

50,000
26,000
0.000
1.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

372,628
98,213
0.274
0.274

0.429
0.500
0.343
0.022
0.341

N

Mean

Median

SD

Loan Approval:
Amount Sought
Amount Funded
Approved
Rejected

Share Lender Type:
Bank
Fintech
Credit Union/CDFI
MDI
Factoring/MCA/CC

11,190
2,891
11,190
11,190

11,190
11,190
11,190
11,190
11,190

Panel C: Unique Lender-Level Data

99,732
51,818
0.157
0.843

0.316
0.425
0.158
0.001
0.101

49,999
27,500
0.000
1.000

0.214
0.463
0.000
0.000
0.000

520,159
73,033
0.330
0.330

0.346
0.351
0.262
0.019
0.189

Loan Variables:
Number Loans
Amount Funded

Share Lender Type:
Bank
Fintech
Credit Union/CDFI
MDI
Factoring/MCA/CC

N

103
103

103
103
103
103
103

Mean

Median

SD

438.087
1,957,476

39.000
253,498

957.677
4,182,994

0.311
0.456
0.087
0.019
0.107

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.465
0.501
0.284
0.139
0.310

Note: This table reports loan application summary statistics focusing on a subset of
applicants for whom we could calculate job tenure and confidently determine loan
rejection. We are able to calculate job tenure if the firm in the Lendio application
matched a firm listed on the applicant’s LinkedIn profile. We are confident the applicant
was rejected if, for a given application date, their application was not approved by any
lender.

if a particular loan application is not funded and we observe that Lendio
subsequently forwards that application to further lenders, we can safely
infer that the application was rejected in the first round.

To build intuition, we present a practical example:

1. Lendio receives an application on June 1.
2. Lendio sends this application to two lenders on June 2, but

neither provide funding.

3. On June 16, Lendio forwards the same application to two new
lenders. Based on information from Lendio, we can infer that the
lenders from June 2 rejected the application.

4. Suppose one lender from the June 16 group approves the loan. In
our data, we identify this lender as making an approval decision.
5. However, we exclude the nonfunding lender from June 16 in our
analysis. We cannot confirm whether the borrower was rejected
or rejected the lender’s offer.

The firms in the Lendio data are selected on applying to a particular
fintech lender. However, consistent with Lendio being a relatively
widely used marketplace, they appear roughly representative of U.S.
firms along a few important dimensions that we are able to observe.

First, the firms have a similar age composition, with 23% in the 6–
10 year old range, compared to 16% of all U.S. firms. Second, Lendio
applicants have a similar organizational structure; for example, 25% are
corporations compared to 18% of U.S. small businesses. Finally, the top
10 states in Lendio are the same as the top 10 states for small businesses
overall, with a roughly similar ordering.18

Paycheck protection program loans. The second main source of data,
which allows us a rare chance to observe self-identified race in a
nonmortgage lending context, is from the Paycheck Protection Program
(PPP), which was established by the CARES Act in March 2020 to
help small businesses struggling during the COVID-19 pandemic. With
more than $800 billion in loans, it is one of the largest single public
finance programs in U.S. history. To facilitate the speedy disbursal of
PPP funds, the federal government outsourced the origination of PPP
loans to private lenders. PPP loans were federally guaranteed, uncol-
lateralized, and forgiveable if used for eligible expenses (in particular,
payroll).

We begin with public administrative data from the Small Business
Administration (SBA) on 11.8 million PPP loans made between April
3, 2020, and May 31, 2021.19 Unfortunately, no data on PPP appli-
cations are available. We first restrict the sample to 4,775,702 ‘‘first
draw’’ loans made before February 24, 2021, when program rules were
changed to explicitly prioritize lending to small firms and minority-
owned businesses. Further, we only consider the 933,645 loans for
which borrowers voluntarily reported their race. It is important to note
the potential bias in self-reporting race. Our analysis does not aim to
provide representative figures for the U.S. population or small business
owners. Instead, we seek to show real-world comparisons between
measures of race within these selected samples, highlighting how and
in what ways they can differ.

Of 933,645 loans with self-identified owner race, 255,355 are from
borrowers with identifiable personal names. For the others, we use
the first executive officer listed in the state business registration, as
supplied by analytics firm Middesk.20 As with our Lendio dataset, we
then implement the BISG and image-based race classifications. The sup-
plemented PPP data results in 867,151 borrowers with ‘‘valid’’ person
names. Out of these, the BISG algorithm produces a racial classifica-
tion for 702,080. From this subset, we manage to assign image-based
race for 33,661. Again, the match rate reflects the stringent matching
criteria we described above. We further filter the data to include only
lenders with more than 10 loans, resulting in a sample of 22,618
borrowers. Summary statistics about these loans and lenders are in
Table 2. The average (median) loan is $138,000 ($39,000). These are
roughly similar to the amounts in the much larger sample of PPP loans
used in Howell et al. (2024).

Lender classification.
In both the Lendio and PPP data, we divide
lenders into the following mutually exclusive groups, roughly following
the approach in Howell et al. (2024):

1. Large, medium, and small banks21;

18 https://data.census.gov/table/BDSTIMESERIES.BDSFAGE?

q=BDSTIMESERIES.BDSFAGE,
_5f7e3afe529c4461970d6f95a6ddb572.pdf,:
publications/a-firm-foundation-how-insurance-supports-the-economy/
a-50-state-commitment/businesses-by-state

https://www.nsba.biz/_files/ugd/fec11a
https://www.iii.org/

19 These data are publicly available here: https://www.sba.gov/funding-

programs/loans/covid-19-relief-options/paycheck-protection-program/
ppp-data.

20 These data on current firm officers as of July 2021 are drawn from
secretary of state registrations. The owner is identified as the first individual
listed as owner or principal under ‘‘business contacts’’ in secretary of state
filings.

21 We define these groups by dividing banks into three equal groups

according to assets.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038579D.L. Greenwald et al.

Table 2
Loan and lender summary statistics (PPP).

Panel A: Unique Borrower-Level Data

Loan Approval:
Number Loans
Loan Amt

Share Lender Type:
Large Bank
Medium Bank
Small Bank
Fintech
Credit Union/CDFI
MDI

N

Mean

Median

SD

22,618
22,618

614.636
138001.568

231.000
38461.000

761.995
384265.622

22,618
22,618
22,618
22,618
22,618
22,618

0.401
0.280
0.144
0.103
0.041
0.030

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.490
0.449
0.352
0.304
0.199
0.170

Panel B: Unique Lender-Level Data

Loan Variables:
Number Loans
Loan Amt

Share Lender Type:
Large Bank
Medium Bank
Small Bank
Fintech
Credit Union/CDFI
MDI

N

369
369

369
369
369
369
369
369

Mean

Median

SD

61.295
166730.113

20.000
44166.648

184.416
497478.855

0.046
0.423
0.344
0.049
0.098
0.041

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.210
0.495
0.476
0.216
0.297
0.198

Note: This table reports loan summary statistics at the borrower (Panel A) and lender
(Panel B) levels.

2. Credit unions, community development financial institutions

(CDFIs) and minority depository institutions (MDIs)22;

3. Factoring, merchant cash advance (MCA), and business credit
card (CC) lenders: These are longstanding alternatives to bank
loans for small businesses, which typically charge very high
interest rates. Factoring involves selling accounts receivable to
the lender. MCAs are loan agreements where repayment is a per-
centage of sales. They appear only in the Lendio data since they
are not SBA-approved lenders and SBA approval was required to
participate in the PPP.

4. Fintechs: These include all lenders officially designated as fin-
techs by the SBA, plus online lenders who originate primarily
for or via fintech partners or platforms, online lenders founded
since 2005, and online lenders that received venture capital
investment.

There are 369 unique lenders in the PPP data, of which 20 are fintechs.
There are 101 unique lenders in the Lendio data, of which 47 are
fintechs. The chance of a fintech (bank) loan among unique borrowers
in Lendio is 42.5% (31.6%). Table 2 shows that the chance of getting
a fintech (bank) loan in our PPP data is 10.3% (82.5%).

Geography-based covariates. We also collect data on socioeconomic
characteristics of the firms in our data, which are summarized in Tables
Appendix A.1 and Appendix A.2. Since BISG is based in large part on
geographic variation, we are interested in how classification errors vary
with geographic characteristics. To this end, we collect data from the
U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey on ZIP code–level
income and demographics, using data from 2019. We focus on two
demographic variables: the share of the population that is Black and
the share of the Black population with a bachelor’s degree. The latter

22 We identify credit unions based on the lender name (i.e., having ‘‘credit
union’’ or ‘‘CU’’ at the end of the name). We identify CDFIs and MDIs using
the FDIC classification.

variable represents a proxy for a relatively advantaged (i.e. lower loan
risk) Black population.23

We also collect two measures of anti-Black racial animus. The first
comes from the implicit association test (IAT), which assesses implicit
bias against Black individuals and is commonly used by researchers (Xu
et al., 2014). The second measure follows (Bursztyn et al., 2021) and
is based on how favorably White respondents rate Black Americans as
a group in the Nationscape survey (Tausanovitch and Vavreck, 2020).
These measures shed light on how lenders’ racial preferences might
affect the error rate of proxies for race.
Last, we collect two measures of

local residential segregation
(Massey and Denton, 1988). The dissimilarity index captures differ-
ences in the distributions of White and Black residents across city tracts.
The isolation index estimates the probability of a Black resident sharing
the same city tract with another Black resident. These segregation vari-
ables are connected to racial preferences, but also enhance the precision
of the geographic component of race. Both the animus and segregation
variables are demeaned and divided by the standard deviation for ease
of interpretation.

Linkedin profile covariates. To understand how prediction errors vary
with borrower-specific characteristics, we use information about edu-
cation from the LinkedIn profiles. These data are reported in a stan-
dardized way on LinkedIn, so we can identify whether a person has
a bachelor’s, bachelor’s of science, master’s, and MBA.24 We expect
that the latter three variables are associated with better career options,
greater wealth, more financial sophistication, and lower risk from
the lender’s perspective. These data are also summarized in Tables
Appendix A.1 and Appendix A.2.

Infutor data. While our data provide the address of each applicant’s
business, the BISG algorithm requires each applicant’s residential ad-
dress as an input. We obtain this by merging the applicant data with
Infutor’s CRD4 dataset, which contains the residential address history
of most U.S. adults. We match each applicant to the closest residential
address that has an inhabitant with the same first and last name at
the time of the application in the CRD4 data. To compute distance, we
first calculate the latitude and longitude of each city as the averages
of the corresponding variables across all addresses in the Infutor data
with the same city and state. We then compute distance between
each city in our application data (the city of the borrowing firm) and
each residential address from their latitudes and longitudes using the
Haversine formula. In cases where we cannot match an applicant to a
resident within 100 km, we use the business address ZIP code in place
of a residential ZIP code. The results are very similar using only the
business location.

Selection bias. We collect our race measures for a subsample of the
raw PPP and Lendio datasets, raising the question of whether this
selection may bias our results. In Appendix F, we explore selection
into our analysis sample using a variety of methods. First, we compare
all zipcode and firm observables across the key subsamples, such as
borrowers who self-report race vs. those that do not in the PPP, and
borrowers for whom we observe an image vs. those for whom we do
not. These are generally quite similar, especially on key variables such
as the zipcode-level Black population share. We also show that the
surname and broader geographical distributions are similar in the raw
and analysis data. Second, we show that BISG and image-based race

23 Borrower education is widely known to predict loan performance, so
much so that there have been concerns among policymakers that using
education data in underwriting could disadvantage protected groups who
typically have less access to education (see here). To highlight how education
is relevant for lending, see here.

24 We also collected MD, PhD, and JD degrees, but excluded these due to

the small sample sizes.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385710D.L. Greenwald et al.

Fig. 4. Borrower race variable statistics (PPP, Unique Borrower–Level).
Note: This figure reports the mean of each race variable on the subsample of
observations for which BISG is able to predict race, 𝑁 = 35,072. The terms SelfID
and image-based are binary variables. For example, 76% of our sample self-identifies
as White. The continuous variable BISG Pct is defined as the actual percent chance the
borrower is Black/White according to the BISG algorithm.

are similarly correlated in Lendio and PPP, and also show that the
kernel density of the BISG distribution is very similar across the key
subsamples. We conclude that while there are some differences between
the analysis and raw samples, they are unlikely to lead to bias that
affects our broader insights.

4. Race prediction outputs: Comparing measures of race

This section compares BISG- and image-based measures of race and
benchmarks them against self-identified race in the PPP data. We focus
on the PPP data as this has a larger sample and includes self-identified
race (recall we only use those borrowers who self-identify race to build
the PPP sample). Essentially all of the findings also apply to Lendio,
and we point to the parallel Lendio statistics in footnotes.

We first compare the measures. Note that self-identified race and
image-based race should not be expected to capture the same concept
of race, in that how one self-identifies is not always how one is
perceived. Nonetheless, a higher correlation with self-identified race
should indicate a better measure. Fig. 4 shows that across all applicants
in the PPP sample, 6.6% report being Black (SelfID) while 76% report
being White. Using image-based race, these statistics are 7% and 81%,
respectively. Using BISG, they are about 9% and 75%.25

Correlation rates between the variables are in Table 3. In the first
three rows, we present the correlation between indicators for being
self-identified Black, image-based Black, and the continuous measure
of BISG Black. The correlation between self-identified and image-based
race is 0.87, while the correlation between self-identified race and BISG
race is just 0.54. In Appendix G, we document that this correlation is
somewhat lower than analogous ones reported in other studies, which
usually revolve around 70%. We show that this is a direct consequence
of BISG being a biased measure of race in the PPP sample because the
share of Black individuals in the PPP sample is lower than that in the
population upon which BISG is calibrated. In the subsequent rows, we
present the same correlations for predictions that use alternative inputs.
The two inputs to BISG are geography and surname. We can see that
using each of these individually to predict self-identified Black performs
very poorly, but that geography does a bit better than name.26

In the final column, we use a version of BISG that takes into account
first name (BISFG). This performs better than BISG, with a correlation
of 57% with self-identified race. However, we focus on BISG in much
of the analysis because the CFPB and other U.S. agencies use BISG
to evaluate fair lending compliance, and we wish to speak directly to
the implications of this standard. Also, the sample is larger because
many first names do not have a race distribution, which means that
in practice, BISFG is less useful.

Having established that image-based race is better correlated with
self-identified race, we turn to BISG errors, which we describe with
the terms false positive and false negative. These take either image-based
or self-identified race as the ‘‘truth’’, but note that we mean ‘‘truth’’
and use terminology such as ‘‘is Black’’ in only a statistical sense. The
reader should keep in mind that this is a simplification and no single
measure is the truth for every individual. With this in mind, we use
the term ‘‘false positive’’ to mean that a person is not Black according
to our chosen baseline measure, but BISG identifies them as Black.
Likewise, ‘‘false negative’’ implies that the person is Black according
to our chosen baseline measure, but BISG fails to recognize them as
such.

In the full PPP sample, Fig. 5 Panels A and C show that using
either self-identified or image-based race as true race, about 88% of
the sample are true negatives. To analyze the socioeconomic predictors
of BISG errors, we concentrate on the subsample that is either true
Black or BISG-predicted Black (true positives, false positives, and false
negatives). In this population, there are about 3630 unique applicants.
Fig. 5 Panel B (D) shows that when ‘‘actual race’’ is based on self-
identified (image-based) race, the true positive rate is 26% (27%), the
false positive rate is 46% (44%), and the false negative rate is 28%
(29%). Thus, BISG is more likely to misclassify Black applicants than
to correctly classify them. Once again, the results are very similar using
self-identified and image-based race as the ‘‘truth’’, which validates the
image-based measure. In Appendix A.6, we show that the same patterns
hold using image-based race in the Lendio data.

In sum, these statistics document that race measures differ substan-
tially, with BISG performing much worse than image-based race when
self-identified race is the benchmark. In fact, the BISG algorithm pro-
duces more false positives and false negatives than true positives when
categorizing Black applicants. These errors make evaluating compliance
with fair lending standards more challenging and reduce the precision
of estimates of disparate impact.

5. Race prediction errors are not random

Building on our previous finding that the BISG algorithm has a high
error rate, we now study whether those errors are systematically related
to applicant characteristics.

We focus attention on the narrow sample where at least one race
measure classified the applicant as Black. This allows us to make two
comparisons. The first is between the false positives and the individuals
who are Black according to the image-based measure (comprising the
true positive and false negative groups). The second comparison is
between the false negatives and individuals who are Black according to
BISG (the combined true positive and false positive groups). We exclude
the true negatives from this analysis because they would otherwise
dominate the sample, preventing us from effectively highlighting the
differences of interest between the other groups. Within this sample,
we correlate being false positive and false negative Black with so-
cioeconomic characteristics of the borrower using both the PPP and
Lendio data. As the PPP dataset is considerably larger and likely more
representative (since a wide range of firms applied to PPP), these data
are our primary focus. We present results for both image-based and self-
identified race measures within the PPP data, which helps to further
validate the image-based measure.

25 The corresponding figure for Lendio is Appendix Figure Appendix A.1.
26 The corresponding rates for Lendio are in Appendix Table Appendix A.3.

To quantify these effects, we run a series of regressions where we
regress being either false positive or false negative Black on each of

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385711D.L. Greenwald et al.

Table 3
Correlations between race variables (PPP).

Black (Image)
Black (SelfID)
BISG Black Percent
Black (Geography)
Black (Surname)
Black (Firstname+Surname)

Black
SelfID

0.87***

BISG
Black
Percent

0.56***
0.54***

Black
Geography

Black
Surname

0.38***
0.36***
0.72***

0.41***
0.38***
0.63***
0.18***

Black
Firstname
Surname

0.51***
0.47***
0.54***
0.20***
0.69***

BIFSG

0.60***
0.57***
0.86***
0.62***
0.50***
0.73***

Note: This table shows correlation coefficients between race variables. BISG Black Percent is the continuous probability of
being Black from BISG. For lender-level analysis, we use this continuous probability of being Black as determined by the BISG
algorithm. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Fig. 5. BISG error rates (Unique Borrower–Level).
Note: This figure presents mean error types for observations where BISG can predict race. Each error type is defined relative to a benchmark ‘‘true race’’. For example, True
Positive (SelfID) means that the business owner self-identifies as Black and is categorized by BISG as Black. True Positive (image-based) means both image-based and BISG measures
classify the owner as Black. Panels A and B, containing all error types, have 35,072 observations. Panels C and D only include the ‘‘Within Black’’ sample, which is the subsample
where the borrower is classified as Black by either the algorithm or by the ‘‘true race’’ measure. Panel C has 4973 observations. Panel D has 4882 observations.

a set of socioeconomic characteristics in our PPP data. Fig. 6 displays
the regression results, where blue dots represent the coefficient on false
negative and orange dots represent the coefficient on false positive.
Panel A uses our image-based measure as ‘‘true’’ race for classification,
while Panel B uses self-reported race. For both panels, we restrict to our
‘‘within Black’’ sample that excludes true negatives (correctly classified
non-Black applicants). Our results are highly similar across these two
classification types, so we report statistics from Panel A (image-based

race) unless otherwise noted. All regressions are additionally reported
in tabular form in Appendix Table Appendix A.5.

We begin with demographic variables at the ZIP level. Because
BISG combines a surname probability, which does not depend on
geography, and ZIP-level race shares, these demographic variables will
summarize how BISG errors vary across geography. The first row of
Fig. 6 represents the regression results using the independent variable
of whether an area’s share of Black residents is above or below the

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385712D.L. Greenwald et al.

Fig. 6. Effect of socioeconomic covariates on BISG errors (PPP).
Note: This figure shows estimates of a set of regressions, each of either False Negative Black or False Positive Black on one of the socioeconomic characteristics in each row of
the 𝑦-axis, using the ‘‘within Black’’ sample. The indicator variable False Positive Black is equal to one if BISG categorizes the borrower as Black, but our ‘‘correct’’ measure (either
image-based or self-reported race) does not. The indicator variable False Negative Black is equal to one if BISG categorizes the borrower as non-Black, but the baseline measure
categorizes them as Black. Panel A’s sample includes borrowers classified as Black either by the algorithm or by the image-based measure (𝑁 = 4882). Panel B’s sample comprises
borrowers who either self-identified as Black on their PPP loan application or were algorithmically classified as Black; 𝑁 = 4973.

national median. Since BISG is increasing with the Black share of the
population by construction, BISG will predict that all applicants are
more likely to be Black in areas with high Black share. These higher
BISG probabilities of being Black in turn create more false positive er-
rors (when the applicant is actually non-Black) and fewer false negative
errors (when the applicant is actually Black). This intuition is confirmed
by Fig. 6 Panel A (image-based race), which shows that residing in a

location with an above-median Black share of the population increases
the chance of being a false positive by 5pp (12% of the mean) and
decreases the chance of being a false negative by 27pp (94% of the
mean).27

27 See Tables Appendix A.4 and Appendix A.5 for precise regression

coefficients.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385713D.L. Greenwald et al.

Next, while the Black share of the area’s population influences
which type of errors we observe, the total number of prediction errors
is related to the racial diversity within the ZIP code. Areas with more
heterogeneous populations will have more misclassified applicants,
while a hypothetical area with no heterogeneity (a single racial group
only) would be perfectly classified by BISG. Correspondingly, the next
two rows show that measures of segregation predict lower levels of both
types of error.28

We consider other socioeconomic characteristics at the geographic
(ZIP) level in the following two rows of Fig. 6. While BISG is me-
chanically determined by demographics, how these characteristics line
up with demographics provides important context for the impacts of
regulatory policy. The results show that local income and the share
of the local Black population with a bachelor’s degree have more
false negative errors and fewer false positive errors, with particularly
strong effects on the share of false negatives. These result stem from a
confound with race: because areas with higher incomes and education
levels tend to have a lower Black population on average, BISG tends to
produce more false negative and fewer false positive errors in these
areas. We also consider measures of racial animus at the ZIP level,
which we find to be associated with more false positive errors and fewer
false negative errors, meaning that Black borrowers are less likely to be
misclassified in areas with higher racial animus.

The last six variables of Fig. 6 comprise a set of individual-level
education indicators obtained from applicants’ LinkedIn profiles. These
results align with our previous results at the geographic level, albeit
with more noise. For all of the postgraduate education outcomes as
well as for the bachelor’s of science, we see that higher education
predicts more false negative errors and fewer false positive errors.
The effect of having any postgraduate degree is particularly strong,
reducing the chance of being a false positive by 10pp (over 22% of the
mean) and increasing the chance of being classified as false negative
by 5pp (17% of the mean) in Panel A (image-based race). There is
no predictive power for having a bachelor’s degree, which may reflect
the fact that this is less informative for small business owners who
are also on LinkedIn, a sample selected on a higher likelihood of
having a bachelor’s. Overall, the correlations confirm at the individual
level that highly educated Black borrowers are particularly likely to be
misclassified as non-Black by BISG.

These results have important effects for regulatory policy. In light
of our findings in Section 2, BISG-based regulation incentivizes lending
toward borrowers with false positive errors and away from borrowers
with false negative errors. Applied to our findings above, this means
that BISG-based regulation encourages more lending to borrowers in
disadvantaged areas: those with a high Black share of the population,
lower incomes, higher racial animus, and where Black residents are less
educated. At the individual level, we theorize that BISG-based regula-
tion incentivizes lending away from highly educated Black borrowers
and toward less educated non-Black borrowers. These potential socioe-
conomic effects of regulation at both the geographic and individual
level will be important considerations for policymakers.

6. Approval rate analysis

In the previous section, we showed the existence of large predic-
tion errors and demonstrated that they covary with socioeconomic
characteristics at the geographic and individual level. In this section,
we study how these errors aggregate to bias measured disparities in
approval rates across racial groups, which are frequently used as inputs
in evaluating compliance with fair lending laws.

28 The lone exception is the dissimilarity measure of segregation in the False

Negative model, which cannot be distinguished from zero.

A central part of complying with fair lending rules is disparate
treatment and disparate impact analyses, where the compliance offi-
cer or regulator asks whether the lender is serving protected groups
(e.g., Black individuals) in a similar way to the majority group (e.g.,
White individuals). Note that a full analysis requires information on the
risk level of applicants, which we do not observe. However, comparing
approval rates across groups is an important first step; if a lender can
show that they approve a similar share of applicants in protected groups
as control groups, then government regulators will not typically look
further for evidence of discriminatory conduct. The U.S. Interagency
Fair Lending Examination Procedures, which apply to five federal
agencies including the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, detail how approval rates should be used by
fair lending examiners. The first indicators of disparate treatment in
underwriting are ‘‘substantial disparities among the approval/denial
rates for applicants by monitored prohibited basis characteristic’’. In
order to determine whether a detailed investigation is necessary, the
procedures mandate that ‘‘after calculating denial rates between the
control and prohibited basis groups for the underwriting centers, ex-
aminers should select the centers with the highest fair lending risk’’.
Therefore, in our analysis, we focus on disparities in approval rates as
an important dimension of compliance evaluation.

In the remainder of this section, we first measure approval rates
at the aggregate level, showing that the use of BISG biases implied
approval rates for Black borrowers up and would lead regulators to
perceive a smaller gap between Black and non-Black borrowers than
actually exists using our image-based measure. We add rigor to these
results in a formal regression setting to establish the statistical signifi-
cance of our results and robustness in the presence of controls and fixed
effects. Last, we extend our analysis by incorporating a variant of BISG
that adds information on first name (BIFSG).

Results: Approval rates. We now measure implied approval rates under
our various measure of race in the Lendio sample, which are displayed
in Table 4. We find that BISG errors have a large effect on measured
approval rates. Using our image-based measure, applications by Black
applicants are approved at a 6.2% rate, while applications by non-Black
applicants are approved at a 8.5% rate, for a difference of 2.3pp. But
when classifying race using BISG, the corresponding approval rates are
7.0% for Black applicants and 8.3% for non-Black applicants, implying
a difference of only 1.3pp. As a result, using BISG in place of a more
accurate measure would lead regulators to understate the true gap in
approval rates by over 43%. Repeating this exercise to compare Black
and White applicants specifically, we see that moving from image-based
to BISG-based race reduced the measured approval gap between White
and Black applicants from 2.5pp to 1.4pp, corresponding to an even
larger 44% decrease. In summary, approval rate disparities between
Black applicants and other applicants appear dramatically smaller when
predicting race using BISG instead of our image-based measure.

We break down these approval rates by BISG error type in Fig. 7.
The lowest approval rate, at 5.6%, is for true positive Black, where
both BISG and image measures agree that the business owner is Black.
The next-lowest rate is for false negatives at 6.7%, corresponding to
borrowers for whom image-based race is Black but BISG predicts non-
Black. The approval rate is significantly higher for false positives, where
BISG (and thus the regulator) predicts an applicant is Black but they
are not actually Black, at 8.7%. Finally, the approval rate is 8.5% for
true negatives. As derived in Section 2, the higher approval rates for
false positives compared to false negatives drives the bias in measured
approval rates. This gap between false positives and negatives aligns
closely with the predictions of the model, since under BISG-based
regulation a lender does not get ‘‘credit’’ for lending to false negative
borrowers under the fair lending evaluation, but will for lending to false
positive borrowers.

Having documented differences in approval rates across lenders
when employing different race measures, we now turn to the initial

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385714D.L. Greenwald et al.

Table 4
Lendio application-level summary statistics.

N

Mean

Median

SD

Applicants by Race:
Apps from Black (Image)
Apps from White (Image)
Apps from Non-Black (Image)
Apps from Black (BISG)
Apps from White (BISG)
Apps from Non-Black (BISG)

47,504
47,504
47,504
47,504
47,504
47,504

Approvals Among Applicants of Race:
Approved Black (Image)
Approved White (Image)
Approved Non-Black (Image)
Approved Black (BISG)
Approved White (BISG)
Approved Non-Black (BISG)

7,618
33,232
39,886
6,560
33,514
40,944

Loans Among Approved Borrowers:
Approval Share Black (Image)
Approval Share White (Image)
Approval Share Non-Black (Image)
Approval Share Black (BISG)
Approval Share White (BISG)
Approval Share Non-Black (BISG)

3,875
3,875
3,875
3,875
3,875
3,875

Difference in Loans (Image Less BISG):
Diff Loans Black
Diff Loans White
Diff Loans Non-Black

3,875
3,875
3,875

0.160
0.700
0.840
0.138
0.705
0.862

0.062
0.087
0.085
0.070
0.084
0.083

0.122
0.746
0.878
0.118
0.726
0.882

0.004
0.020
−0.004

0.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
1.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
1.000

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.367
0.458
0.367
0.345
0.456
0.345

0.241
0.282
0.279
0.255
0.277
0.277

0.327
0.435
0.327
0.323
0.446
0.323

0.363
0.440
0.363

Note: This table presents loan application summary statistics for the Lendio sample.
The unit of observation is a loan application. The top group includes all applications.
The second panel shows the rate of approval among applicants predicted to be of
a particular race. The third panel reports the share of approvals going to borrowers
predicted to be of a particular race. The fourth panel reports the difference in loan
shares between the different measures of race in the third panel.

Fig. 7. Lendio approval rate by group.
Note: This figure plots the approval rate by error type, focusing on a subset of 47,481
applicants for whom we could calculate job tenure and confidently determine loan
rejection. We are able to calculate job tenure if the firm in the Lendio application
matched a firm listed on the applicant’s LinkedIn profile. We are confident the applicant
was rejected if, for a given application date, their application was not approved by any
lender.

phase of a compliance evaluation, which looks for differences in ap-
proval rates across protected and control groups. Specifically, as the
disparity in the approval rates across Black and White individuals
narrows, the likelihood of regulators initiating an investigation de-
creases. Therefore, we explore whether different race measures at the
application level predict different loan approval gaps. We show that
BISG errors lead the BISG-based Black measure to have poor predictive
power.

While the results above document differences in approval rates
across lenders when employing different measures of race, it is possible
that these differences could be explained by confounding, or could
simply be due to noise in an insufficiently large sample. To address this,
we use our Lendio data to formally estimate variants of the regression
model

1(Approved𝑖,𝑙) = 𝛼𝑙 + 𝛼𝑡 + 𝛽1(Black𝑖) + 𝐗𝑖𝛿 + 𝜀𝑖𝑙,

(17)

where 𝑖 denotes an applicant and 𝑙 denotes a lender. We include fixed
effects for the lender (𝛼𝑙) and for the year of application (𝛼𝑡) and control
for the log amount of funding sought by the applicant. In some models,
we further include the full set of socioeconomic characteristics seen in
Fig. 6.

The results are in Table 5. Columns 1 and 2 regress approval on
a single indicator for being Black, either our image-based measure
(Column 1) or the BISG-predicted measure (Column 2). These regres-
sions echo the kind of analysis a regulator might perform to evaluate
disparate lending outcomes across races. Comparing these columns
shows that, while both indicators negatively predict approvals, the
indicator on image-based race is larger in magnitude, with a point
estimate of −1.8pp, approximately 64% larger than the corresponding
coefficient on the BISG-based measure (−1.1pp). The estimated effect
of the image-based measure is also more statistically significant, with a
𝑡-statistic of −3.6, compared to −2.2 for the BISG-based measure. Thus,
a regulator using BISG would perceive approval gaps to be both smaller
and more likely to be explained by noise than a regulator using an
image-based measure. We separately investigate the two components
of BISG, surname and geography in Table 6.

We next incorporate both indicators on the right hand side of the
regression, with the results displayed in Column 3. These estimates
show that the predictive power of the BISG indicator is largely sub-
sumed by the image-based indicator, failing to provide independent
variation. Specifically, the point estimate on the image-based indicator
remains virtually unchanged from Column 1 at −1.6pp, whereas the
point estimate on the BISG indicator loses its statistical significance.
Column 4 displays estimates of this regression with socioeconomic
controls and finds that the results are essentially unchanged. These
results imply that the BISG-based race measure is not only weaker
than the image-based measure in terms of predicting approvals, but
is essentially redundant for fair lending evaluations, with very little
additional predictive information added compared to the image-based
measure alone.

Finally, we disaggregate our results by splitting the positive or
negative values of the BISG indicator into subcategories depending on
whether the classification aligns with our image-based measure or not,
keeping the true negatives as the omitted group. We see a very large
negative coefficient of −2.3pp for the true positive category where both
image and BISG classify borrowers as Black. However, the coefficient
on the false positive group, which BISG incorrectly classifies as Black,
is virtually zero. By averaging these two groups, which are of similar
size, the overall BISG indicator loses predictive power. Furthermore,
the BISG indicator overlooks the strong negative coefficient of −1.3pp
for the false negative group of those BISG incorrectly identified as non-
Black. These results support the conclusion that classification errors
vitiate BISG’s predictive power, and cause it to be subsumed by the
image-based measure when they are both included.

Our baseline model does not exactly align with this variation in
approval rates in the data. Recall that in the baseline model we assume
for parsimony that the BISG probability 𝑞 has no impact on loan
fundamentals, and thus only influences approval rates through the
regulatory channel whereby higher-𝑞 borrowers can relax a BISG-based
regulatory constraint by more. As a result, approval rates should be
weakly increasing in 𝑞 conditional on race, and strictly increasing in
𝑞 if the regulatory constraint binds. However, in practice (Fig. 7 and
Table 5) show that false positive (high-𝑞 non-Black) applicants have

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385715D.L. Greenwald et al.

Table 5
How image and BISG race measures predict loan approval.

Dependent variable:

Black (Image)

Black (BISG)

True Positive Black (BISG)

False Positive Black (BISG)

False Negative Black (BISG)

Observations
Application Year FE
Lender FE
Log Amt Sought
Socioecon Controls
P-value
R-squared
Y-mean

Approved

(1)

−0.018∗∗∗
(0.005)

(2)

−0.011∗∗
(0.005)

(3)

−0.016∗∗∗
(0.005)
−0.004
(0.005)

(4)

−0.016∗∗∗
(0.005)
−0.002
(0.006)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

0.073
0.08

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

0.073
0.08

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.061
0.073
0.08

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.047
0.075
0.08

(5)

(6)

−0.023∗∗∗
(0.006)
−0.000
(0.007)
−0.014∗∗
(0.006)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.003
0.073
0.08

−0.021∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.001
(0.007)
−0.013∗∗
(0.006)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.004
0.075
0.08

Note: Columns (1) and (2) in this table provide estimates based on Eq. (17), where the key independent variables indicate whether image-based
race and BISG-based race classify the applicant as Black. In columns (3) and (4), we report the 𝑝-value on a one-tailed 𝑡-test testing whether
the coefficient on image-based race is larger than the coefficient on BISG-based race. In columns (5) and (6), we report a similar 𝑃 -value for
whether the True Positive coefficient is significantly larger than the False Positive coefficient. Columns (3) and (4) decompose prediction errors
by providing estimates based on Eq. (17), using four indicators that describe how image-based race aligns with BISG-based race: True Positive,
False Positive, False Negative, and True Negative Black. The base group True Negative is omitted. For instance, True Positive indicates that
the business owner is classified as Black by both image-based and BISG-based measures. Standard errors are double-clustered by lender and
borrower; ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 6
How image and geography-based race measures predict loan approval.

Dependent variable:

Black (Image)

Black (Algorithm)

True Positive Black

False Positive Black

False Negative Black

Observations
Application Year FE
Lender FE
Log Amt Sought
Socioecon Controls
P-value
R-squared
Y-mean

Approved

Geography

(1)

−0.018∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.001
(0.006)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.000
0.073
0.08

(2)

−0.017∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.003
(0.007)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.000
0.075
0.08

(3)

(4)

−0.015∗
(0.008)
−0.001
(0.008)
−0.019∗∗∗
(0.005)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.000
0.073
0.08

−0.010
(0.010)
0.002
(0.009)
−0.018∗∗∗
(0.005)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.000
0.075
0.08

Surname

(5)

−0.019∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)

(6)

−0.018∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.000
0.073
0.08

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.000
0.075
0.08

(7)

(8)

−0.023∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.010
(0.008)
−0.014∗∗∗
(0.005)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.000
0.073
0.08

−0.022∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.011
(0.008)
−0.013∗∗
(0.006)

47,481
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.000
0.075
0.08

Note: Columns (1) and (2) in this table provide estimates based on Eq. (17), where the key independent variables indicate whether image-based race and zip-based race classify the
applicant as Black. Columns (5) and (6) do the same using surname-based race. In Columns (1) and (2), as well as (5) and (6), we report the 𝑃 -value on a one-tailed t-test testing
whether the coefficient on image-based race is larger than the coefficient on zip or surname-based race, respectively. In Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8), we report a similar 𝑃 -value
on a one-tailed t-test for whether the True Positive coefficient is significantly larger than the False Positive coefficient. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) decompose prediction errors
by estimating variants of Eq. (17), using four indicators that describe how image-based race aligns with zip/surname-based race: True Positive, False Positive, False Negative, and
True Negative Black. True Negative is the base group and is omitted. For instance, True Positive indicates that the business owner is classified as Black by both image-based and
zip/surname-based measures. Standard errors are double-clustered by lender and borrower. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

an approval rate that is only barely higher than true negative (low-𝑞
non-Black) applicants. Further, true positive (high-𝑞 Black) applicants
have a lower approval rate than false negative (low-𝑞 Black) applicants.
These are problematic in the baseline model because the first result
would imply that the regulatory constraint is close to slack, while
the second is strictly impossible in that model. These patterns reflect
loan fundamentals pushing in the opposite direction as the regulatory
incentive.

In Appendix E, we extend the model by allowing 𝑞 to be correlated
with loan fundamentals, which better explains the observed patterns.

This correlation is intuitive because 𝑞 is correlated with lower local
income as well as lower individual educational achievement.29 Because
this negative correlation between 𝑞 and fundamentals would create

29 In the absence of underlying frictions, the likelihood of a name being
associated with a Black borrower will not be negatively correlated with loan
repayment probability. However, exploring these frictions is outside the scope
of this paper, so we leave an investigation of the frictions that might cause
this negative correlation to future work.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385716D.L. Greenwald et al.

a negative slope of approvals with respect to 𝑞 in the absence of
regulation, our extended model shows that approval rates that are flat
or even declining with respect to 𝑞 can be consistent with a strong
influence of regulatory incentives, since approvals would be even more
negatively sloped without them.

Approval rate decomposition.
In the analysis above, we establish the
existence of a bias in the approval rate gap, which appears to be much
smaller when race is measured using BISG compared to our image-
based measure. We next formally decompose this approval gap into its
statistical components to more fully understand the sources of bias.

Define the approval gap to be the difference between the average
approval probability of an application from a non-Black borrower
and the average approval probability of an application from a Black
borrower. Then we can measure the bias in the approval gap as

𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠 = 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐺𝑎𝑝𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺 − 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐺𝑎𝑝𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒

(18)

where 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐺𝑎𝑝𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 and 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐺𝑎𝑝𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺 measure this gap using
our image-based and BISG-based measures of race, respectively (see
Appendix D.1 for a formal definition). In Appendix D.1, we show that
the bias term in (18) is approximately equal to

𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠 ≃

(1− ̄𝐵)−1 + ̄𝐵−1)
(

Cov

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

)

(
𝟏𝑖, max(𝐵𝑖 − 𝑞𝑖, 0)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
false neg.

− Cov

)

(
𝟏𝑖, max(𝑞𝑖 − 𝐵𝑖, 0)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
false pos.

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

(19)

where 𝟏𝑖 is an indicator for a loan being approved, 𝐵𝑖 is an indicator
for being Black under our image-based measure, and 𝑞𝑖 is the BISG
probability of being Black. To understand the false positive and false
negative terms, note that 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐵𝑖 is the BISG prediction error, rep-
resenting the difference between the BISG-Black probability and the
actual (image-based) Black indicator. When 𝑞𝑖 < 𝐵𝑖, the error goes in
the false negative direction (the BISG probability is too low), the false
positive term in (19) is zero, and the false negative term is positive.
When 𝑞𝑖 > 𝐵𝑖, the error goes in the false positive direction (the BISG
probability is too high), the false positive term in (19) is positive, and
the false negative term is zero.

Eq. (19) implies that the measured bias should be higher when
more false negative borrowers are approved (higher covariance be-
tween approval and false negative errors), and lower when more false
positive borrowers are approved (higher covariance between approval
and false positive errors). Intuitively, when a false negative borrower is
approved, this increases the non-Black approval rate in the BISG-based
measure, increasing the BISG-based approval gap, but increases the
Black approval rate in the image-based measure, shrinking the image-
based approval gap, which together increase the bias term in (19). The
reverse logic holds for approval of a false positive borrower, which
increases the Black approval rate measured by BISG, but increases the
non-Black approval rate using the image-based measure, decreasing the
bias in (19).

Eq. (19) allows us to decompose the sources of approval gap bias.
In particular, we can separate the bias between what the regulator
observes and the true approval rate gap into three components: (i) a
component due to the relative approval rates of false negative borrow-
ers, (ii) a component due to the relative approval rates of false positive
borrowers, and (iii) a residual due to the fact that (19) holds only
approximately.

With this lead-up, we can now quantify our decomposition. Dif-
ferencing our measured approval rates in Table 4, we find that the
overall approval gap bias in (19) is −1.01pp, meaning that regulators
using BISG underestimate the true approval gap. This can be additively
decomposed into a contribution from false negative errors of −1.09pp,
a contribution from false positive errors of −0.13pp, and a contribution
from the approximation residual of +0.20pp. Represented as a share of

the total, these components explain 107.2%, 12.5%, and −19.7% of the
bias, respectively.

These results show that the difference in the approval gap mea-
sured by regulators relative to the true (image-based) approval gap
is overwhelmingly due to lower approval rates among false negative
borrowers. These correspond to borrowers who are Black according to
our image-based measure, but are misclassified with high probability
as non-Black by BISG due to having either a geographic location or a
surname that is shared with relatively few other Black people.

Adding first name.
In an extension, we add the first name to last name
and geography. In the social sciences, the most rigorous evidence of
racial discrimination is from correspondence audit studies in which first
names are used to signal race (Butler and Broockman, 2011; Milkman
et al., 2012; Bartoš et al., 2016; Giulietti et al., 2019).30 Distinctively
Black first names may be related to parental identity and socioeconomic
status (Fryer and Levitt, 2004; Gaddis, 2017; Kreisman and Smith,
2023). As far as we know, first name is not used by regulators in
assessing fair lending.

In Appendix Table Appendix A.11, we evaluate the BIFSG algorithm,
which extends BISG by using both first and last name (see Voicu, 2018).
This approach has the downside of more missing observations (see
Section 1). BIFSG has better predictive power over approvals than BISG
(columns 1–2), though image-based race continues to outperform.31
The improved power with first names is mostly due to a larger negative
coefficient on false positives. Therefore, the improved performance
of BIFSG is driven by how its errors correlate with approval rates;
this could reflect false positives being more strongly associated with
lower socioeconomic status when first name is included (i.e., the first
name is more ‘‘Black’’), consequently decreasing the likelihood of loan
approval. Indeed, we observe that measures of disadvantage, such as
low local per capita income, more strongly predict being false positive
Black using BISFG. In sum, while the inclusion of first names in the race
prediction algorithm improves its performance slightly, the improve-
ment does not reflect the impact of true positives but rather an increase
in false positives associated with lower socioeconomic status.

Overall, this section shows that in our sample, image-based race
predicts loan approval better than BISG-based race. Disaggregating the
BISG errors reveals that BISG’s poor performance is largely due to
false negative Black individuals being less likely to get approved. This
is relevant for evaluating lender compliance with fair lending laws.
Suppose a lender primarily serves a demographic with a high false
negative rate. If these individuals, who are indeed Black, are less likely
to secure loans, as is the case in our sample, the lender will seem,
under a BISG regime, to approve a larger share of Black applicants
than they really do, creating an illusion of better compliance with fair
lending laws. BISG errors could also induce distortionary incentives to
cater to a demographic with a higher false positive rate in order to
maintain compliance. These errors and potential for manipulation may
undermine the intent of the law if they make true Black applicants less
able to secure credit.

7. Lender-level analysis

Having established the impact of prediction errors on the aggregate
population, we now refine our scope to study how these effects vary at
the lender level. The key point to keep in mind is that if two lenders
serve different socioeconomic groups, the bias in BISG may lead fair

30 A prominent example where the title conveys the process is (Bertrand and
Mullainathan, 2004): ‘‘Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and
Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination’’.

31 First names alone are not especially predictive (Appendix Table Appendix
A.12). In Appendix Table Appendix A.13, we predict approval using each race
measure separately. Here we see that algorithms which include the first-name
(columns 5–6) are more predictive than BISG or its components (columns 2–4).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385717D.L. Greenwald et al.

lending regulators to arrive at different compliance conclusions even if
the two lenders are actually lending to Black-owned firms at the same
rates. We construct a measure for the difference in approval rates at
the lender level using image-based race vs. BISG-based race as:

Table 7
Lender-level summary statistics (Lendio, one-per-lender).

Panel A: Lendio Approval Statistics by Race

N

Mean

Median

SD

𝛥Share Black Appr = ̄𝜋𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒

− ̄𝜋𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺
𝐵
𝐵
# Image Black Approved
# Image Black Applicants

=

−

# BISG Black Approved
# BISG Black Applicants

.

(20)

The first term on the right hand side of Eq. (20) is the number of
Black applicants who are approved scaled by the total number of Black
applicants, using the image-based indicator for being Black. The second
term is defined analogously, except we use the continuous percent
Black term produced by the BISG algorithm.32

In Appendix D.1, we derive an analogue to (19) for this case:

𝛥Share Black Appr ≃ ̄𝐵−1

Cov

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

)

(
𝟏𝑖, max(𝐵𝑖 − 𝑞𝑖, 0)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
false neg.

− Cov

)

(
𝟏𝑖, max(𝑞𝑖 − 𝐵𝑖, 0)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
false pos.

.

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

(21)

As with our approval rate bias decomposition, Eq. (21) shows that
𝛥Share Black Appr is increasing in the approval rate among false negative
borrowers, and is decreasing in the approval rate among false posi-
tive borrowers.33 Since there is a positive correlation between false
negatives and advantaged socioeconomic status, a lender serving more
privileged Black borrowers would have a higher 𝛥Share Black Appr . In
contrast, lenders serving a higher proportion of false positive borrowers
would appear more compliant with fair lending laws than they actually
are, with a lower 𝛥Share Black Appr .34

Lender-level results: Lendio sample. We summarize 𝛥Share Black Appr in our
Lendio sample in Table 7 Panel A (bottom section, ‘‘Difference in
Rates by Race Measure’’). On average, it is close to zero, yet there
is large variation. To explore this variation, Fig. 8 plots 𝛥Share Black Appr
for each lender. The graph shows large variation across lenders, with
some having large negative and others large positive 𝛥Share Black Appr .
Furthermore, there seems to be some suggestive ordering by lender
type, with 𝛥Share Black Appr being more frequently negative for banks and
factoring/MCA/CC and more commonly positive for fintech lenders.
Note that merchant cash advances, factoring, and business credit card
products are long-standing and predate fintechs; they are typically as-
sociated with very high interest rates. However, this sample of lenders
is far from representative of small business lenders in the U.S.; for
example, Lendio’s client base skews substantially towards fintechs.
Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that banks and other conventional small
business lenders lean towards the negative side while fintechs lean
towards the positive side. Banks typically rely on soft information
for underwriting (Petersen and Rajan, 1994; Berger and Black, 2011),
while fintechs and large banks are more automated and arms-length
than small banks (Howell et al., 2024; Balyuk et al., 2020).

32 Specifically, we sum the probabilities that an applicant is Black according
to BISG within each lender’s portfolio, and divide the sum by the sum of
probabilities than each applicant within the lender’s portfolio falls into all the
different racial categories.

33 We present the lender-specific false positive and false negative rates in
Appendix Figures Appendix A.2, Appendix A.3, Appendix A.4, and Appendix
A.5.

34 To put it differently, if 𝛥Share Black Appr

is positive, then # Image Black Approved
# Image Black Applicants
> # BISG Black Approved
. This implies that the lender is serving the Black population
# BISG Black Applicants
at a higher rate than BISG makes it appear. Conversely, if 𝛥Share Black Appr
is
negative, then the lender is not serving as high a share of Black applicants as
it appears.

Share of Applicants by Race:
Share Apps from Black (Image)
Share Apps from White (Image)
Share Apps from Black (BISG)
Share Apps from White (BISG)

103
103
103
103

Approval Rate Among Applicants of Race:
Approval Rate Black (Image)
Approval Rate White (Image)
Approval Rate Black (BISG)
Approval Rate White (BISG)

103
103
103
103

Loan Rate Among Borrowers of Race:
Share Loans to Black (Image)
Share Loans to White (Image)
Share Loans to Black (BISG)
Share Loans to White (BISG)

103
103
103
103

0.136
0.725
0.127
0.699

0.069
0.098
0.097
0.104

0.091
0.557
0.074
0.551

Difference in Rates by Race Measure (Image Less BISG):
Diff Approval Rate Black
Diff Approval Rate White
Diff Loan Rate Black
Diff Loan Rate White

−0.006
−0.006
0.016
0.006

103
103
103
103

0.118
0.727
0.114
0.696

0.000
0.043
0.021
0.044

0.000
0.714
0.043
0.678

−0.000
0.000
0.000
0.020

0.116
0.159
0.093
0.139

0.197
0.155
0.219
0.165

0.188
0.391
0.108
0.353

0.053
0.070
0.131
0.164

Panel B: PPP Approval Statistics by Race

N

Mean

Median

SD

Loan Rate Among Borrowers of Race:
Share Loans to Black (Image)
Share Loans to White (Image)
Share Loans to Black (BISG)
Share Loans to White (BISG)

369
369
369
369

0.053
0.849
0.080
0.778

Difference in Rates by Race Measure (Image Less BISG):
Diff Loan Rate Black
Diff Loan Rate White

−0.027
0.071

369
369

0.025
0.889
0.054
0.798

−0.019
0.059

0.080
0.145
0.076
0.152

0.066
0.090

Note: This table shows lender-level approval statistics by race. ‘‘Share Apps’’ is the
proportion of applications from applicants identified as a particular race out of total
applications received by that lender. ‘‘Approval Rate’’ is the fraction of applications
approved from applicants of a specified race. ‘‘Share Loans’’ is the ratio of approved
loans from borrowers of a certain race to the total number of approved loans. ‘‘Diff
Approval Rate’’ is the difference between ‘‘Approval Rate’’ measured by image-based
is the
race and ‘‘Approval Rate’’ measured by BISG. Similarly,
difference between ‘‘Share Loans’’ measured by image-based race and ‘‘Share Loans’’
measured using BISG.

‘‘Diff Loan Rate’’

Fig. 8. Lender-level difference in loan approval rates by race measure (Lendio).
Note: This figure plots, for each lender, the 𝛥ShareApprovedBlack . This is the difference in
the approval rates among Black applicants between image-based and BISG measures,
corresponding to 𝜋𝐴𝑅
in the model. Each bar represents 𝛥ShareApprovedBlack for one
of the 101 unique lenders in the Lendio analysis data. The bars are colored according
to the lender type. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend,
the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

𝑖,𝑗 − 𝜋𝑃 𝑅
𝑖,𝑗

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385718D.L. Greenwald et al.

Table 8
Relationship between lender type and differences in lending rates across race measures (Lendio, PPP).

Lendio (Share approved)

PPP (Share loans)

Fintech

Factoring/MCA/CC

Large Bank

Medium Bank

Credit Union/CDFI

MDI

Observations
R-squared
Y-mean

𝛥 > 0
(1)

0.15
(0.10)
0.02
(0.15)

𝛥
(2)

−0.00
(0.01)
−0.04∗
(0.02)

𝛥 > 75 Pctile
(3)

0.12
(0.08)
−0.02
(0.13)

94
0.030
0.245

94
0.045
−0.006

94
0.029
0.170

𝛥 > 0
(4)

0.59∗∗∗
(0.10)

0.22∗∗
(0.10)
−0.02
(0.05)
0.15∗∗
(0.08)
0.01
(0.11)

368
0.110
0.234

𝛥
(5)

0.08∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)
−0.01∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.02)

368
0.109
−0.026

𝛥 > 75 Pctile
(6)

0.64∗∗∗
(0.10)

0.21∗∗
(0.11)
−0.00
(0.05)
0.15∗
(0.08)
0.00
(0.11)

368
0.113
0.250

Note: Columns 1–3 show estimates of the association between lender type and percentiles of 𝛥ShareApprovedBlack , the difference in approval rate of Black applicants
based on image-based race versus BISG-based race. We exclude Credit Unions and CDFIs due to their small representation. The omitted group is small banks.
Columns 4–6 report estimates of how lender type is associated with percentiles of 𝛥ShareLoansBlack , the difference in the share of Black borrowers as determined by
image-based race versus BISG-based race. Here too, the omitted group is small banks. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Table 8 assesses whether certain lender types are associated with
levels of 𝛥Share Black Appr . To do this, we run a simple regression to
measure the links between 𝛥Share Black Appr and three lender types—
banks, fintechs, and factoring/MCA/CC—with banks as the reference
category. We consider the following dependent variables: an indicator
for 𝛥Share Black Appr being positive, the continuous value of 𝛥Share Black Appr ,
and an indicator for 𝛥Share Black Appr being above its 75th percentile. As
shown in columns 1–3, fintechs are more likely to be at the top of the
distribution, although the results are noisy.

Lender-level results: PPP sample. The PPP data has the advantage of
many more lenders, which are largely representative of the universe of
U.S. small business lenders. While the PPP data do not have anything
analogous to an approval or rejection rate, we can take a different
approach to defining disparate impact by measuring the share of loans
to Black-owned firms:

𝛥Share Loans Black =

# Image Black Borrowers
# All Borrowers

−

# BISG Black Borrowers
# All Borrowers

.

(22)

We again take the difference between the share using image-based
race and the share using BISG race. The lender-specific differences
for the 368 unique lenders in our PPP analysis sample are shown in
Fig. 9. Factoring/MCA/CC lenders are absent in the PPP data as they
were never SBA-approved to participate. As in the Lendio data, fintechs
are more frequently on the positive (right) side of the distribution,
while banks are more commonly concentrated on the left. We assess
whether there are significant differences in Table 8 columns 4–6, using
six lender categories. Since we have many lenders, we consider small,
medium, and large banks separately, with small banks as the omitted
category. Here, we see a more precise result, with fintechs being much
more likely to have a high 𝛥Share Loans Black compared to small banks. For
example, they are 64pp more likely to have a positive 𝛥Share Loans Black ,
which is 256% of the mean (column 4). Credit unions, CDFIs, and
minority depository institutions are also somewhat more likely to have
higher 𝛥Share Loans Black .

The above results have nuanced implications for policy, though
further research is needed to determine whether these findings can
be generalized to a broader, more representative sample. The results
suggest that some banks might benefit from a BISG-based fair lending
evaluation.

This point is directly related to an ongoing policy debate. The
Dodd-Frank Act of 2012 required the CFPB to promulgate regulations

Fig. 9. Lender-Level Difference in lending rates by race measure (PPP).
This figure plots, for each lender, the 𝛥ShareLoansBlack . This is the difference
Note:
in the lending rates to Black firm owners between image-based and BISG measures,
corresponding to 𝜋𝐴𝑅
in the model. Each bar represents 𝛥ShareLoansBlack for one of
the 369 unique lenders in the PPP analysis data. The bars are colored according to
the lender type. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

𝑖,𝑗 − 𝜋𝑃 𝑅

𝑖,𝑗

on the collection and reporting of self-identified race data in small
business lending (referred to as ‘‘1071’’ due to the Section of the Act).
There has been stiff opposition from the small banking community
to 1071.35 Banks point out that the new reporting would be costly;
indeed, the CFPB estimates the costs of the policy at $46-$100 per loan
application.36 After the CFPB final rulemaking in March 2023 requiring
the collection of race among other variables, banking associations sued,
and the rule was indefinitely stayed in July 2023.37

Our results are also consistent with fintechs serving Black appli-
cants with higher socioeconomic status. This highlights intricate equity

35 (see here and here).
36 See p. 760 here: https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_

1071-final-rule.pdf.

37 Texas Bankers Association, et al. v. CFPB, see https://caselaw.findlaw.

com/court/us-dis-crt-s-d-tex-mca-div/114780286.html.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385719D.L. Greenwald et al.

implications of shifting from BISG-based race measures to ones more
reflective of how individuals are typically perceived by others (image-
based race) or self-identified race. Since false negatives are associated
with higher socioeconomic status, if lenders adjust lending towards
more false positives and fewer false negatives, the net effect could lead
to lending to individuals of lower socioeconomic status, independent of
race.

Given that raw approval gaps are used by regulators to identify
the lenders that warrant more serious investigations, this raises the
question of whether the magnitude of the approval rate gap is large
enough to shift lenders into or out of the ‘‘serious investigation’’ group.
For example, suppose regulators use raw approval rate gaps to rank
lenders according to their Black/non-Black approval gaps and then
investigate the lenders with the largest gap. How often would the
composition of high-gap lenders change based on how race is mea-
sured? We calculate that if we consider the 10% of lenders with the
highest Black/non-Black approval gaps, 40% of them would change
their identity if we measured the gap using image-based race rather
than BISG-implied race. Redoing this exercise to look at the top 20%,
30%, 40%, and 50% of lenders implies switching rates of 35%, 26%,
29%, and 26%, respectively. We conclude that BISG errors matter not
only for the magnitude of approval gaps among lenders, but are also
highly influential in determining relative rankings and the identities of
lenders most likely to face investigation.

8. Counterfactual exercise

In Section 2 we examined a regulatory environment in which
lenders are constrained by how much their approval rates may differ
across groups. In that setting, shifting from a regulatory environment
based on BISG-predicted race to one based on actual race would lead
to a linear reduction in approvals for BISG-predicted Black (‘‘BISG-
Black’’) applicants and a linear increase in approvals for actual Black
applicants. In this final exercise, we study the potential impact of such
a counterfactual policy change, where we proxy for actual Black race
with image-based Black race (‘‘image-Black’’). Since we do not observe
the environment without regulatory constraints, we cannot directly
identify the size of the 𝜆 multipliers. As a result, the exact size of this
shift is not clear. Instead, our results allow us to describe the direction
of this change, without taking a stand on the magnitude.

We begin with our approval rate regression, Eq. (17), and consider
changing the coefficients on the BISG-Black and image-Black variables
while holding the overall approval rate fixed. Specifically, we can
compute counterfactual approval rates as follows:

𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺↓

𝑖

𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒↑

𝑖

𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐵𝑜𝑡ℎ

𝑖

= 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑖 − ℎ × (𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺𝑖 − 𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺),

(23)

= 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑖 + ℎ × (𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 − 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘),
[

(24)
]
.
(𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 − 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘) − (𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺𝑖 − 𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺)

= 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑖 + ℎ ×

(25)

Eq. (23) computes a counterfactual approval rate where the weight on
BISG-Black probability has been lowered by an arbitrary small constant
ℎ. To focus on changes in the tilt toward or away from different types
of applicants, rather than changes in the overall level of borrowing,
we remove the mean of the BISG-Black variable before multiplying by
ℎ so that the average approval rate is unchanged between Eqs. (23)
and (17). In a second counterfactual experiment, we apply a symmetric
procedure, increasing the weight on the image-Black variable to create
the counterfactual approval rate in Eq. (24). Finally, we simultaneously
apply both an increase in the weight on the image-Black measure and
a decrease in the weight on the BISG-Black measure in Eq. (25). This
last experiment most closely approximates the directional shift from the
BISG-based regulatory environment to one based on actual race.

We study the effect of these changes on the characteristics of the
approved population. For each characteristic 𝑍 and each counterfactual

scenario 𝐶, we compute the weighted average of that characteristic
among approved applications as

𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝐶

𝑍 =

∑

𝑖 𝑍𝑖𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐶
𝑖
∑
𝑖 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐶
𝑖

.

(26)

The directional change in that variable under the counterfactual sce-
nario is

𝑑𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝐶

𝑍 =

𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝐶

𝑍 − 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑍

ℎ

=

Cov(𝑍𝑖, 𝑋𝑖𝑗 )

𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑

,

(27)

where 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑍 is from Eq. (26) using the actual approval rate
𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑖 in place of 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐶
𝑖 , Cov(𝑍𝑖, 𝑋𝑖𝑗 ) is the sample covariance
of 𝑍𝑖 with 𝑋𝑖𝑗 , 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑 is the sample mean approval rate, and 𝑋𝑖𝑗 is
the policy variable we are adjusting, which is either 𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺𝑖, 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖, or
(𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 − 𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐺𝑖). The variable 𝑑𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝐶
𝑍 thus represents the
derivative of the share of the approved population with characteristic
𝑍 as we move in the direction of policy counterfactual 𝐶. We derive the
second equality in Appendix D.1, which holds regardless of the value
of ℎ.

The results are displayed in Table 9, where columns (1), (2), and
(3) correspond to the counterfactuals lowering the weight on BISG-
Black (Eq. (23)), increasing the weight on image-Black (Eq. (24)), and
applying both changes at once (Eq. (25)), respectively. Because the
two variables are positively correlated, these two changes generally
have effects of opposite signs. However, because prediction errors can
be correlated with socioeconomic characteristics, the magnitudes can
differ, leading to a nontrivial net change.

Panel A displays the impact on the shares of approved borrowers by
image-based and BISG-based race classification. The first row displays
the impact on the share of approved applications to image-Black bor-
rowers. Since BISG scores are positively correlated with image-Black
status, reducing the loading on BISG reduces this share, while increas-
ing the loading on image-Black status increases it. Due to prediction
errors, however, the effect of increasing the image-Black weight is
roughly three times stronger than the effect of decreasing the BISG-
Black weight. On net, the paired change would substantially increase
the share of loans going to image-Black borrowers, with a 0.99pp
increase in the image-Black share for every 1pp change in the approval
weights.

The remaining rows of Panel A repeat this exercise by the joint
image and BISG classification. Our results in Column (3) show that the
vast majority of the net increase in the image-Black share stems from
a 0.73pp increase in the False Negative share, compared to only an
increase in the True Positive share of only 0.25pp. Examining Columns
(1) and (2) reveals that while increasing the image-Black weight has
a similar impact on both the True Positive and False Negative shares,
reducing the BISG weight has a much stronger countervailing effect
on True Positive applicants (whose BISG scores are high) compared to
False Negative applicants (whose BISG scores are low), explaining the
overall result.

Turning to the bottom two rows of Panel A, representing the effect
on non-Black borrowers, we see that the net policy decreases the False
Positive share by -0.28pp and the True Negative share by -0.70pp.
Because the base rates of these groups are so different, representing
5.8% and 82.0% of approved applications in our data, this is actually
a much larger proportional effect on False Positive borrowers, whose
high BISG scores are more affected by the decreased loading on BISG
compared to True Negative borrowers.

In Panel B of Table 9, we analyze how these counterfactuals affect
socioeconomic characteristics at the ZIP code level, using the same set
of characteristics used in Fig. 6. Overall the net effects (Column (3)) are
modest and not of consistent direction. One the one hand, some effects
somewhat favoring more advantaged areas, with the average approved
borrower living in an area with $40 higher local per-capita income,

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385720D.L. Greenwald et al.

Table 9
Counterfactual exercise.

Characteristic

(1)
BISG Weight ↓

(2)
Image Weight ↑

(3)
Net Change

Panel A: By Classification, Full Sample

Image Black Share
True Positive Share
False Negative Share
False Positive Share
True Negative Share

-0.66
-0.52
-0.14
-0.17
0.84

Panel B: By Socioeconomic Characteristics, Full Sample

Local PC Income (Thousands)
Share Pop Black
Share Pop ≥ Bachelors
Share Black Pop ≥ Bachelors
Segregation (Dissimilarity)
Segregation (Isolation)
Animus (IAT Explicit)
Animus (Nationscape)

0.14
-0.36
0.08
0.06
-0.11
-0.84
-0.17
-0.32

1.65
0.77
0.88
-0.11
-1.54

-0.10
0.33
-0.06
-0.02
0.31
0.97
0.17
0.33

Panel C: By Socioeconomic Characteristics, Within Image-Black Subpopulation

Local PC Income (Thousands)
Share Pop Black
Share Pop ≥ Bachelors
Share Black Pop ≥ Bachelors
Segregation (Dissimilarity)
Segregation (Isolation)
Animus (IAT Explicit)
Animus (Nationscape)

0.39
-0.99
0.26
0.18
-0.41
-1.52
-0.26
-0.21

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.99
0.25
0.73
-0.28
-0.70

0.04
-0.03
0.02
0.04
0.20
0.13
-0.00
0.01

0.39
-0.99
0.26
0.18
-0.41
-1.52
-0.26
-0.21

Note: This table displays the results from the counterfactual exercise in Section 8. Specifically, each cell displays the derivative
of the share of approved applications going to borrowers with a given characteristic with respect to a marginal decrease in
the weight in our approval regression (17) on BISG (Column 1), a marginal increase in the weight on being classified as Black
by our image-based measure (Column 2), and both marginal changes simultaneously (Column 3). See Section 8 for further
details.

0.03pp lower Black population share, and 0.02pp and 0.04pp of the
overall and Black population having a Bachelor’s degree or higher,
respectively. On the other hand, Column (3) also shows a net increase
in lending to areas with higher segregation, and no differential effect
by animus. All told, these results show little effect on socioeconomic
characteristics when applied to the full sample.

In sharp contrast, Panel C shows the impact of the change in policy
on socioeconomic characteristics among image-Black borrowers. Because
these borrowers all have the same image-Black classification, changing
the image weight has no effect on relative lending propensities across
borrowers within this subpopulation, leading to a uniform finding of
zero effect in Column (2). However, because image-Black borrowers
have differing BISG probabilities, the effect of changing this loading
in Column (1) will have relative effects across this subsample, which
translate into nonzero effects in Column (3). Overall, Panel C reveals
changes that are roughly an order of magnitude larger than their
full-sample counterparts, and now consistently favor more advantaged
areas. In particular, the average approved image-Black applicant lives
in an area with $390 higher per-capita income, 0.99pp lower Black
population share, 0.26pp and 0.18pp higher shares of the overall and
Black population with a Bachelor’s degree, less segregation, and less
racial animus.

To understand why these results differ, note that the change in
policy can be decomposed into two effects. First, the policy tilts lending
overall toward Black borrowers and away from non-Black borrow-
ers. Second, the policy tilts lending within each racial group toward
borrowers with lower BISG scores. Because Black borrowers live in
less advantaged areas, the first effect favors disadvantaged areas. But
because BISG scores are also correlated with lower socioeconomic
advantage, the second effect favors more advantaged areas. Our results
in Panel B imply that these two effects roughly cancel out, leading to
little change in lending by socioeconomic characteristics overall. Our
results in Panel C, however, show that moving from a BISG-based policy
to one based on actual or self-reported race that the approval rate

gains to the Black population would be disproportionately concentrated
among Black borrowers living in more advantaged or affluent areas.

9. Conclusion and policy discussion

There is ‘‘folk knowledge’’ among practitioners and researchers that
the widely used race prediction algorithms based on name and location
perform poorly. Although these demography-based measures might
predict race reasonably well for some groups, they can have large error
rates when names have ambiguous cultural origins or when the popu-
lation in specific locations is diverse. Recognizing the discrimination
historically faced by Black Americans in credit markets and the con-
sequent interest of regulators, compliance officers, and researchers in
this group, we concentrate on analyzing the accuracy of these proxies in
predicting whether a small business borrower is Black. If errors in these
algorithms are correlated with socioeconomic characteristics that are
related to loan profitability, this could influence apparent compliance
with fair lending laws based on the employed measure of race—-
whether it is image-based, self-identified, or BISG. This has important
implications for policy, including potential sanctions for certain lenders
and giving more latitude to new fintech lenders, particularly if they
serve Black applicants at higher rates than conventional lenders.

Despite anecdotal reports, there is, to our knowledge, no compre-
hensive documentation of the potential consequences of race prediction
algorithm errors in a nonmortgage context. Understanding the perfor-
mance, comparative efficiencies, and correlations with socioeconomic
traits of these algorithms is, therefore, a unique contribution.

In this paper, we introduce an image-based measure of perceived
race, which we show better correlates with self-identified race than
BISG. We then show that the large errors in BISG yield more com-
bined false positives (not being Black when BISG predicts Black) and
false negatives (being Black when BISG predicts not-Black) than true
positives. These errors are systematically related to measures of socioe-
conomic advantage; false positive Black individuals tend to be more
disadvantaged, while false negative Black individuals are generally

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385721D.L. Greenwald et al.

more advantaged. Using data on loan approvals, we show that image-
based Black race is a stronger negative predictor of loan approval than
BISG-based Black race, reflecting lower approval rates for false negative
Black applicants. Our theoretical framework shows how BISG-based fair
lending compliance evaluations could incentivize lenders to manipulate
their performance by adjusting their lending rates to individuals whom
BISG misclassifies.

Our findings imply that regulators, researchers, and practitioners
should consider their specific objectives before selecting a method
for measuring race. For instance, if a regulator’s goal is to identify
individuals who are Black and relatively disadvantaged within the
Black community, our results indicate that BISG may serve quite well.
However, if the goal is to identify Black individuals who experience dis-
crimination based solely on skin tone and facial features, our findings
expose significant limitations in BISG, suggesting that self-identified or
image-based data might be more suitable. Our results have real-world
implications beyond lending to domains such as university admissions,
healthcare, and research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Daniel L. Greenwald: Writing – original draft, Conceptualiza-
tion. Sabrina T. Howell: Writing – original draft, Conceptualization.
Cangyuan Li: Writing – original draft, Conceptualization. Emmanuel
Yimfor: Writing – original draft, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

This project received funding from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
Sabrina Howell has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Daniel Green-
wald has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Emmanuel Yimfor has no
conflicts of interest to disclose. Cangyuan Li has no conflicts of interest
to disclose.

Data availability

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/g547vfzybp/2.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Bellucci, A., Borisov, A., Zazzaro, A., 2013. Do banks price discriminate spatially?
Evidence from small business lending in local credit markets. J. Bank. Financ. 37
(11), 4183–4197.

Berg, T., Burg, V., Gombović, A., Puri, M., 2020. On the rise of fintechs: Credit scoring

using digital footprints. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (7), 2845–2897.

Berger, A.N., Black, L.K., 2011. Bank size, lending technologies, and small business

finance. J. Bank. Financ. 35 (3), 724–735.

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2004. Are Emily and Greg more employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination. Amer. Econ.
Rev. 94 (4), 991–1013.

Bhutta, N., Hizmo, A., 2021. Do minorities pay more for mortgages? Rev. Financ. Stud.

34 (2), 763–789.

Blanchflower, D.G., Levine, P.B., Zimmerman, D.J., 2003. Discrimination in the

small-business credit market. Rev. Econ. Stat. 85 (4), 930–943.

Blattner, L., Nelson, S., 2021. How costly is noise? Data and disparities in consumer

credit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.07554.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Bursztyn, L., Chaney, T., Hassan, T.A., Rao, A., 2021. The Immigrant Next Door:
Exposure, Prejudice, and Altruism. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Butler, D.M., Broockman, D.E., 2011. Do politicians racially discriminate against
constituents? A field experiment on state legislators. Am. J. Political Sci. 55 (3),
463–477.

Charles, K.K., Guryan, J., 2008. Prejudice and wages: An empirical assessment of

Becker’s the economics of discrimination. J. Polit. Econ. 116 (5), 773–809.

Chernenko, S., Scharfstein, D.S., 2021. Racial Disparities in the Paycheck Protection
Program. Technical Report, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3907575
or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3907575.

Cook, L.D., Marx, M., Yimfor, E., 2022. Funding Black High-Growth Startups. Technical

Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

D’Acunto, F., Ghosh, P., Jain, R., Rossi, A.G., 2020. How costly are cultural

biases? Available at SSRN 3736117.

Dimmock, S.G., Gerken, W.C., Graham, N.P., 2018. Is fraud contagious? Coworker
influence on misconduct by financial advisors. J. Finance 73 (3), 1417–1450.
Dobbie, W., Liberman, A., Paravisini, D., Pathania, V.S., 2021. Measuring bias in

consumer lending. Rev. Econ. Stud. 88 (6), 2799–2832.

Egan, M., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2022. When harry fired sally: The double standard in

punishing misconduct. J. Polit. Econ. 130 (5), 1184–1248.

Erel, I., Liebersohn, J., 2020. Does Fintech Substitute for Banks? Evidence from the
Paycheck Protection Program. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Fairlie, R.W., Fossen, F., 2021. Did the $660 Billion Paycheck Protection Program and
$220 Bbillion Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program Get Disbursed to Minority
Communities in the Early Stages of COVID-19?. Technical Report, National Bureau
of Economic Research.

Fairlie, R.W., Robb, A.M., 2007. Why are black-owned businesses less successful than
White-owned businesses? The role of families, inheritances, and business human
capital. J. Labor Econ. 25 (2), 289–323.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

Fairlie, R., Robb, A., Robinson, D.T., 2022. Black and white: Access to capital among

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103857.

References

Ambrose, B.W., Conklin, J.N., Lopez, L.A., 2021. Does borrower and broker race affect

the cost of mortgage credit? Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (2), 790–826.

minority-owned start-ups. Manage. Sci. 68 (4), 2377–2400.

Frame, W.S., Huang, R., Mayer, E.J., Sunderam, A., 2022. The Impact of Minority Rep-
resentation at Mortgage Lenders. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Fremont, A., Weissman, J.S., Hoch, E., Elliott, M.N., 2016. When race/ethnicity data
are lacking: Using advanced indirect estimation methods to measure disparities.
Rand Health Q. 6 (1).

Anwar, S., Fang, H., 2006. An alternative test of racial prejudice in motor vehicle

Fryer, R.G., Levitt, S.D., 2004. The causes and consequences of distinctively Black

searches: Theory and evidence. Amer. Econ. Rev. 96 (1), 127–151.

names. Q. J. Econ. 119 (3), 767–805.

Arnold, D., Dobbie, W., Yang, C.S., 2018. Racial bias in bail decisions. Q. J. Econ. 133

Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Schnabl, P., Vickery, J., 2019. The role of technology in

(4), 1885–1932.

Asiedu, E., Freeman, J.A., Nti-Addae, A., 2012. Access to credit by small businesses:
How relevant are race, ethnicity, and gender? Amer. Econ. Rev. 102 (3), 532–537.
Athey, S., Karlan, D., Palikot, E., Yuan, Y., 2022. Smiles in Profiles: Improving Fairness
and Efficiency Using Estimates of User Preferences in Online Marketplaces. National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Balyuk, T., Berger, A.N., Hackney, J., 2020. What is fueling fintech lending? The role of
banking market structure. The Role of Banking Market Structure (June 23, 2020).
Bartik, A.W., Nelson, S.T., 2024. Deleting a signal: Evidence from pre-employment

credit checks. Rev. Econ. Stat. 1–47.

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1854–1899.

Gaddis, S.M., 2017. How Black are Lakisha and Jamal? Racial perceptions from names

used in correspondence audit studies. Sociol. Sci. 4, 469–489.

Giacoletti, M., Heimer, R., Yu, E.G., 2021. Using high-frequency evaluations to estimate
discrimination: Evidence from mortgage loan officers. Available at SSRN 3795547.
Giulietti, C., Tonin, M., Vlassopoulos, M., 2019. Racial discrimination in local public
services: A field experiment in the United States. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 17 (1),
165–204.

Howell, S.T., Kuchler, T., Snitkof, D., Stroebel, J., Wong, J., 2024. Lender automation

and racial disparities in credit access. J. Finance 79 (2), 1457–1512.

Bartlett, R., Morse, A., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2022. Consumer-lending discrimination

Jiang, E.X., Lee, Y., Liu, W.S., 2021. Disparities in consumer credit: The role of loan

in the fintech era. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 30–56.

officers in the FinTech era. Available at SSRN.

Bartoš, V., Bauer, M., Chytilová, J., Matějka, F., 2016. Attention discrimination: Theory
and field experiments with monitoring information acquisition. Amer. Econ. Rev.
106 (6), 1437–1475.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., Ross, S.L., 2018. What drives racial and ethnic differences
in high-cost mortgages? The role of high-risk lenders. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (1),
175–205.

Kabir, P., Ruan, T., 2023. Reducing racial disparities in consumer credit: Evidence from

anonymous loan applications. Available at SSRN 4364852.

Knowles, J., Persico, N., Todd, P., 2001. Racial bias in motor vehicle searches: Theory

and evidence. J. Polit. Econ. 109 (1), 203–229.

Kreisman, D., Smith, J., 2023. Distinctively Black names and educational outcomes. J.

Polit. Econ. 131 (4), 877–897.

Begley, T.A., Purnanandam, A., 2021. Color and credit: Race, regulation, and the quality

Massey, D.S., Denton, N.A., 1988. The dimensions of residential segregation. Soc. Forces

of financial services. J. Financ. Econ. 141 (1), 48–65.

67 (2), 281–315.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385722D.L. Greenwald et al.

Milkman, K.L., Akinola, M., Chugh, D., 2012. Temporal distance and discrimination:

Tang, H., 2019. Peer-to-peer lenders versus banks: Substitutes or complements? Rev.

An audit study in academia. Psychol. Sci. 23 (7), 710–717.

Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1900–1938.

Petersen, M.A., Rajan, R.G., 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: Evidence from

small business data. J. Finance 49 (1), 3–37.

Pool, V.K., Stoffman, N., Yonker, S.E., 2015. The people in your neighborhood: Social

interactions and mutual fund portfolios. J. Finance 70 (6), 2679–2732.

Tausanovitch, C., Vavreck, L., 2020. Methodology and Representativeness Assessment,
Oct 10–17, 2019 (version 20200814). Technical Report, Democracy Fund +
UCLA Nationscape, URL https://www.voterstudygroup.org/uploads/reports/Data/
Nationscape-User-Guide_2020sep10.pdf.

Price, J., Wolfers, J., 2010. Racial discrimination among NBA referees. Q. J. Econ. 125

Tootell, G.M., 1996. Redlining in Boston: Do mortgage lenders discriminate against

(4), 1859–1887.

neighborhoods? Q. J. Econ. 111 (4), 1049–1079.

Robb, A., Robinson, D.T., 2018. Testing for racial bias in business credit scores. Small

Voicu,

I., 2018. Using first name information to improve race and ethnicity

Bus. Econ. 50 (3), 429–443.

classification. Stat. Public Policy 5 (1), 1–13.

Serengil, S.I., Ozpinar, A., 2020. Lightface: A hybrid deep face recognition framework.
In: 2020 Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications Conference. ASYU,
IEEE, pp. 1–5.

Xu, K., Nosek, B., Greenwald, A., 2014. Psychology data from the race implicit
association test on the project implicit demo website. J. Open Psychol. Data 2
(1).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385723