Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Journal of Financial Economics 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec 

Tiny trades, big questions: Fractional shares 

Robert P. Bartlett a, Justin McCrary b, Maureen O’Hara c,* 
a Stanford Law School, United States 
b Columbia University Law School, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), United States 
c Johnson College of Business, Cornell University, United States   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

This  paper  investigates  fractional  share  trading.  We  develop  a  latency-based  method  for  identifying  a  large 
sample of fractional share trades. We find that high-priced stocks, meme stocks, IPOs, SPACs, and popular retail 
stocks exhibit considerable numbers of these tiny trades. We surmise that this reflects dollar-based order entry, 
with many tiny trades being fractional components of larger orders. We show that our fractional trade measure is 
predictive of future liquidity and volatility, suggesting a new metric to capture the information in retail trades. 
We identify how data and reporting protocols preclude knowing the extent of fractional share trading, inflate 
volume data, and provide censured samples of these off-exchange trades.   

Original content: Tiny Trades, Big Questions 
data set (Reference data)  

JEL classification: 
G14 
G21 
G23 
G24 

Keywords: 
Fractional shares 
Retail trade 
Robinhood trading 
FINRA 
Trade reporting 

1. Introduction 

Retail  trading  in  equities  markets  is  enjoying  a  renaissance.  No 
longer the “quirky side show” of years past, estimates of retail trading 
rose  from  20%  of  the  market  in  2010,  to  perhaps  as  high  as  40%  in 
2021.1 U.S. retail brokerage accounts increased from 59 million in 2019 
to 95 million in 2021. Fidelity alone had 32.5 million accounts in 2021, 

with Charles Schwab reaching 29.6 million accounts and relatively new 
entrant Robinhood Markets hitting 23 million accounts and hosting 13 
million monthly users.2 Causes of this retail resurgence are varied, but 
the entrance of fintech trading apps such as Robinhood and Cash-App, 
the introduction of commission-free trading in 2018, and even the dis-
tribution of stimulus checks are noted as prime factors.3  So, too, is the 
introduction of fractional share trading in 2019 which allowed investors 

We thank the editor Nikolai Rossanov and an anonymous referee for many helpful comments. We also thank Kevin Crotty, Elisabeth De Fontenay, Lisa Fairfax, Jill 
Frisch, Itay Goldstein, Frank Partnoy, Krishna Ramaswamy, Christopher Schwarz, Eric Talley, Chaojun Wang, and seminar participants at Arrowstreet Capital, UC 
Berkeley Law, Columbia Law, MIT, the Microstructure Exchange, the Wharton-Penn Law workshop, the SEC Division of Economic and Risk Analysis, the 2023 annual 
meeting of the American Law and Economics Association, and the SFS Cavalcade 2023. Research for this paper was made possible in part by the Paul J. Evanson 
Professorship and the Henry and Lucy Moses Faculty Research Fund at Columbia Law School. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: mo19@cornell.edu (M. O’Hara).   

1  As we discuss later in the paper, determining the exact size of retail trading is difficult. Jeffries estimated U.S. retail trade in 2021 as 32%, Reuters put it at 30%, 

and the Economist at 40%. See “Just how mighty are active retail traders”, Economist, Aug. 21, 2021.  

2  Data from “Factbox; The U.S. retail trading frenzy in number,” Reuters, Jan. 29, 2021.  
3  While the boredom of the COVID-19 lockdown may have been a cause of this upswing, it appears to have had sticking power. From 2021 to 2022, Fidelity retail 
accounts increased to 37 million, and Charles Schwab increased its number of accounts to 34 million. While Robinhood may have been the posterchild for lockdown- 
induced trading, Robinhood accounts held steady at 23 million accounts and even monthly average users declined only modestly to 11.4 million. See https://invest 
ors.robinhood.com/news/news-details/2023/Robinhood-Reports-Fourth-Quarter-and-Full-Year-2022-Results/default.aspx, 
https://content.schwab.com/web/ret 
ail/public/about-schwab/schwab_annual_report_2022.pdf,  and  https://www.fidelity.com/bin-public/060_www_fidelity_com/documents/about-fidelity/2022-Fide 
lity-Investments-Annual-Report.pdf. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103836 
Received 18 August 2023; Received in revised form 20 March 2024; Accepted 22 March 2024   

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103836Availableonline28May20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

to purchase as little as $1 of high-priced stocks like Berkshire-Hathaway 
A  and  Tesla.  This  paper  investigates  fractional  share  trading  with  a 
particular focus on understanding both the scale and impact of this new 
innovation. 

Fractional shares are not really new—and they were usually viewed 
as  a  problem.  Traditionally,  fractional  shares  arose  as  part  of  stock 
dividends that were paid out in shares (or scrips if arising from a stock 
split),  with  dividend  reinvestment  programs  (DRIPs)  the  modern 
formulation of this practice.4 An article in the New York Times in 1930 
decried fractional shares as a “nuisance”  which “clutter up”  accounts, 
are expensive to service, and difficult to sell.5 The modern incarnation of 
fractional share trading is very different in both motivation and practice. 
In  2019,  brokerage  firms  Interactive  Brokers  and  Robinhood  set  up 
dedicated fractional share trading operations to allow retail customers 
to invest a specific amount of money in a stock rather than buy a specific 
number  of  shares.  Other  major  retail  brokers  quickly  followed  suit, 
paving the way for retail access to even the most expensive shares. This 
dollar-based  purchasing  also  set  the  stage  for  individual  indexing, 
whereby retail traders can create personalized indexes largely composed 
of fractional shares.6 

But like in times past, problems remain and even gauging the scale 
and scope of this fractional development is challenging. Fractional share 
trades essentially fall outside of the National Market System (NMS). No 
exchange will accept an order for a fractional share, which means all 
trading takes place in off-exchange venues. Fractional share trades are 
not  included  in  the  Rule  605  execution  quality  reports  required  of 
market  venues,  so  metrics  such  as  transaction  costs  are  not  easily 
determined. As we detail below, it is not even clear exactly how many 
fractional share trades occur due to the disparate clearing and reporting 
protocols that attach to these tiny transactions. Adding to the confusion, 
the consolidated tape does not accept trade reports for less than a single 
share so even the fractional share trades that do report “round up” to one 
share even if the actual trade is for a vastly lower quantity. Bartlett et al. 
(2022) show how this FINRA (Financial Industry Regulatory Authority) 
rule resulted in volume on the tape being drastically over-stated for the 
Class  A  common  stock  of  Berkshire  Hathaway  (BRK.A),  causing  the 
relationship between BRK.A and its paired stock BRK.B to break down, 
and introducing a variety of other negative effects for those securities. 
In  this  paper,  our  interest  lies  in  addressing  some  “big”  questions 
inherent in fractional share trading. First, how important are fractional 
share trades and what determines their daily incidence across stocks? 
Are they only used to access high-priced stocks or are fractional share 
trades  ubiquitous  across  the  market?  Second,  do  these  tiny  trades 
actually matter in any meaningful sense for the market? For instance, 
are they predictive of value-relevant data such as future liquidity and 
volatility? Can fractional shares provide a useful metric for capturing 
retail trading? Third, as fractional share trading continues to grow, what 
challenges does the current reporting regime pose for market structure 
researchers? In particular, how well do the FINRA weekly OTC Trans-
parency data—which, as we show, is a source for weekly data on frac-
tional share trades—capture fractional share trading? Are there biases in 
how it is calculated and if so how much do they matter? Does the over- 

4  See “IBM will use scrip in fractional shares,” New York Times, January 29, 

1946.  

5  The article notes that “of all the tedious and thankless tasks brokers perform 
for their customers, the one which causes them the most grief is disposing of 
fractional shares, or for that matter, the mere routine of carrying them on their 
books. It takes as much time, for instance, to keep books on 11/1500 of a share 
as  on 1,000 shares”  and selling  them is  “much more  difficult…. Most  houses 
charge  a  nominal  commission  which  does  not  pretend  to  cover  the  trouble 
involved”. See “Along the Highways of Finance Fractional Shares a Problem”, 
The New York Times, April 27, 1930.  

6  For a discussion of how such direct indexing works see https://www.fidelit 
y.com/learning-center/trading-investing/direct-indexing or https://www.schw 
ab.com/direct-indexing. 

counting  of  volume  in  the  consolidated  tape  arising  from  fractional 
shares constitute a general problem for the market or is this problem 
largely confined to a subset of high-priced stocks? 

Fundamental  to  being  able  to  address  any  of  these  questions  is 
identifying actual fractional share trades in intra-day data. We do so by 
using the  “digital footprints”  of one-share trades  reported by  the two 
largest  fractional  share  brokers,  Robinhood  and  Drivewealth  (hence-
forth  RHDW  trades).  Our  sample  period  runs  from  March  1,  2021 
through March 31, 2022, and we use our approach and intra-day data to 
classify trades as fractional share RHDW trades during this time period. 
We additionally test our classification model using weekly data from the 
FINRA OTC Transparency platform, which we show can be used to track 
a  portion  of  the  fractional  share  trades  that  occur  each  week  in  the 
market.  We  demonstrate  that  during  our  sample  period  our  classifier 
performs well in predicting fractional share trades reported in the OTC 
Transparency data. In the Appendix, we illustrate how to test and vali-
date this approach applied to more recent periods, giving researchers a 
potential framework for detecting these tiny trades in the intraday trade 
data. 

Our research provides a number of contributions to the literature. 
First, we provide some of the first evidence on what is fast becoming an 
important avenue for retail trade. We find, for example, that during our 
sample  period  TSLA  fractional  share  executions  by  Robinhood  and 
Drivewealth  accounted  for  6.7  %  of  all  TSLA  trades,  over  25%  of  all 
single share trades in the market, and a remarkable 48% of single share 
trades reported to FINRA. Across the 30 stocks with the most fractional 
share  trades,  fractional  RHDW  trades  accounted  for  between  16%  to 
40% of all reported single share trades and between 31% and 50% of all 
reported single share FINRA trades. Across all stocks in our sample, 1.5% 
of  trades  are  fractional  RHDW  trades,  with  13.2%  of  all  single-share 
trades being of  this form. Our work  also demonstrates that fractional 
shares are not just used to buy tiny pieces of high-priced stocks—of the 
top 30 stocks with the largest number of RHDW fractional share trades, 
30%  had  closing  prices  less  than  $50.00  per  share.  This  breadth  is 
exactly what one would expect in a world where orders are increasingly 
entered in dollars rather than whole-shares. 

Second, we demonstrate that fractional share trades may be for small 
amounts, but they can nevertheless contain value-relevant information, 
such  as  with  respect  to  future  volatility  and  spread  movements. 
Regression estimates indicate that a 10% increase in RHDW fractional 
share trades is associated with an 8-basis point increase in the following 
day’s Averaged Percentage Effective Spread; this elasticity is even larger 
if we include only the top 100 fractionally traded stocks. Similar pre-
dictability arises with respect to intra-day volatility and implied vola-
tilities. We also show that that this predictive power is beyond what is 
captured in the widely-used retail trading measure from Boehmer et al. 
(2021)(BJZZ), a result we believe is most likely due to fractional share 
trades being the fractional component of a larger retail trade. Our results 
here show that our metric for identifying RHDW fractional share trades 
(which  we  refer  to  as  the  RHDW-FT  metric)  can  be  a  valuable  and 
generally more accurate metric for representing retail trade. 

Third, notwithstanding our ability to detect RHDW fractional share 
trades  during  our  sample  period,  we  establish  that  there  remains  a 
remarkable  lack  of  clarity  regarding  this  growing  market.  Somewhat 
surprisingly, the current reporting regime undercounts fractional share 
trades but overcounts fractional share trading volume. 

With respect to trade counts, due to disparate reporting protocols, 
there is no way to know the total size of the market. As we discuss, not all 
brokerage firms report fractional share trades to the tape and, among 
those that do, our framework is limited to identifying those executed by 
Robinhood and Drivewealth during our sample period. For other firms, 
we  illustrate  how  to  use  the  OTC  Transparency  data  to  track  their 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038362R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

fractional share trades on a weekly basis, but these data often under-
count such trades due to censoring. We document that these data are not 
actually that transparent. Indeed, we find that for 64% of the stocks in 
our  sample,  the  OTC  Transparency  data  does  not  provide  data  for 
Robinhood’s fractional share trades for even a single week during our 
sample  period  where  our  classifier  estimates  Robinhood  executed  at 
least 200 fractional share trades for the week. For 90% of stocks in our 
sample, the OTC Transparency initiative includes data for less than half 
of these weeks. 

With  respect  to  volume  distortions,  we  show  that  fractional  share 
trades  that  are  reported  to  the  tape  inflate  reported  trading  volume. 
Because each fractional share trade must be rounded up to a whole share 
when reported to the tape, we estimate that overall trading volume was 
inflated by roughly $200 billion during our sample period due solely to 
RHDW fractional share trades. The distortions due to the overcounting 
of  volume  are  worrisome  given  the  link  of  volume  metrics  to  legal 
contexts such as the rules relating to corporate stock repurchases and 
whether investors can bring a class action fraud lawsuit. 

Our research is related to several strands of the literature. There is to 
date only a small literature looking at fractional share trades. Da et al. 
(2024) provide an interesting event study of the market impacts when 
four retail brokerage firms first introduce the ability to trade fractional 
shares in 2019 and 2020. They find that fractional share trading gen-
erates  price  pressures  and  reversals  for  high  priced  stocks  during 
attention generating events. Our findings on the scale and incidence of 
fractional share trading suggest that these effects may now be even more 
broadly  found  in  the  market.  Bartlett  et  al.  (2022),  in  a  companion 
paper,  show  how  FINRA  reporting  rules  resulted  in  severely  inflated 
trading  volumes  for  BRK.A,  and  affected  liquidity  and  pricing  in  the 
market. Our work goes beyond this example to examine the incidence of 
fractional  share  trading  more  broadly  and  its  informational  content, 
while documenting the way that current disclosure rules obfuscate our 
understanding of this increasingly important form of trading. 

There is a much larger literature on retail trading. Relevant for our 
paper is recent research on Robinhood trading and its impacts. Welch 
(2021) finds that Robinhood traders generally tilt towards high-volume, 
high-priced stocks with results suggesting both good timing and good 
alpha. Barber et al. (2022a) find that Robinhood traders engage in more 
attention-induced trading than other retail traders. Moss et al. (2023) 
find that ESG disclosures are irrelevant to Robinhood traders’ portfolio 
allocation decisions. Notably, all of these papers rely on data provided 
by  Robintrack.net,  which  was  decommissioned  in  August  2020.  Our 
analysis here provides the first look at the extensive use of fractional 
share trading by Robinhood traders and during a period of time that is 
unavailable through Robintrack.net. 

A second strand of the literature develops proxies for retail trading. 
Early  attempts  [see  for  example  Lee  and  Radhakrishna  (2000)]  used 
small  trade  size  as  a  proxy  for  retail  orders.  The  rise  of  algorithmic 
trading  and  other  market  trends,  however,  renders  such  an  approach 
untenable (see O’Hara (2015) or O’Hara and Ye (2014) for discussion). 
BJZZ propose a metric that uses price improvement measured in small 
fractions  of  cents  per  share  to  identify  retail  trades  arising  from 
marketable orders, but recent papers [see Barber et al. (2022b); Shearer 
(2022);  and  Battalio  et  al.  (2023)]  raise  concerns  as  to  its  accuracy. 
These authors find Type 1 and Type 2 errors in retail order identification 
and  order  signing  using  the  BJZZ  metric,  which  they  attribute  to  the 
metric missing many retail trades due to its exclusion of mid-point trades 
and trades at the quotes while also faltering by including as retail trades 
some trades actually executed by institutional traders. As we show here, 
also missing from this BJZZ metric is any ability to capture fractional 
share trades. 

Finally,  there  is  a  growing  literature  investigating  whether  retail 
trade is predictive of future price movements [see, for example, Barber 
et al. (2009); Kaniel et al. (2008)]. Jones et al. (2022), using the BJZZ 
metric  to  identify  retail  trading  in  the  pandemic,  conclude  that  such 

trades are predictive of future stock prices. Given recent criticism of the 
BJZZ metric, the latency-based digital footprint framework we develop 
here provides an alternative metric to identify a subset of retail trades 
during our sample period. Indeed, relative to the BJZZ proxy, we illus-
trate how fractional share trades represent a “distilled” measure of retail 
order flow that captures what we refer to as “app-based” trading—that 
is, retail trading that originates largely from mobile-first trading appli-
cations. Consistent with this claim, we find that fractional share trades 
have much stronger predictability of future liquidity and volatility than 
the BJZZ metric, which most likely reflects the fact that fractional share 
trades are often the fractional component of a larger retail order. These 
findings suggest fractional share trading as captured by our RHDW-FT 
metric  can  provide  a  better  proxy  for  identifying  the  type  of  retail 
order flow likely to be predictive of future movements in liquidity and 
volatility. 

This  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  The  next  section  examines  the 
challenges of finding fractional share trades in the consolidated trading 
data, setting out the current reporting rules and illustrating why many of 
these trades are captured in FINRA’s weekly OTC Transparency data. We 
also describe how we exploit existing disclosure rules to classify trades in 
the NYSE Trade and Quote (TAQ) data as RHDW fractional share trades. 
Section 3 uses our sample of RHDW fractional share trades to analyze 
the incidence of these trades in the cross-section of U.S. publicly-traded 
common stocks. We also examine the correlations between the Robin-
hood and Drivewealth subsamples, allowing us to show the consistency 
of fractional share trading across brokers. Section 4 then investigates the 
feasibility of using the RHDW-FT metric as a proxy for app-based retail 
trading  as  well  as  the  information  content  of  these  trades,  testing 
empirically  whether  our  RHDW-FT  metric  is  predictive  of  a  stock’s 
future  liquidity  and  volatility.  Section  5  addresses  weaknesses  with 
respect  to  fractional  share  trade  reporting  in  current  market  data, 
investigating  censuring  in  the  FINRA  OTC  Transparency  data  arising 
from  FINRA’s  de  minimus  rule  as  well  as  volume  inflation  in  the 
consolidated  tape  arising  from  the  rounding-up  of  fractional  share 
trades. Section 6 summarizes our results. The Appendix provides more 
information regarding the classification rule we use to create our sample 
of  RHDW  fractional  share  trades,  including  guidance  for  researchers 
who might seek to apply it beyond our sample period. 

2. How do you find fractional share trades? 

Fractional share trading occurs when a customer places an order that 
results in a trade confirmation indicating that the customer has acquired 
or sold a fraction of a whole share. In terms of the information available 
regarding fractional share trading, U.S. trade reporting rules create an 
uneven landscape at best. Some fractional share trades get reported to 
the public, but others do not, and those that do get reported are reported 
incompletely. There are a variety of reasons for this opacity, including 
alternative  ways  to  report  (or  not  report)  trades,  rounding  rules  that 
distort trade size, censored data due to activity-based disclosure stan-
dards, and non-compliance with FINRA rules. Despite these difficulties, 
we illustrate below how we identify fractional share trades in the TAQ 
data for trades that were executed between February 2021 and March 
2022  by  two  of  the  most  active  brokerage  firms  providing  fractional 
share executions. 

2.1. Why studying fractional share trades is so difficult 

An immediate problem for identifying fractional share trades is that 
retail broker-dealers take two different approaches to executing these 
trades  for  their  customers,  only  one  of  which  triggers  clear  public 
reporting obligations for the fractional share trade. The first approach, 
exemplified  by  Apex Clearing, to  the best  of  our knowledge  does  not 
result in the fractional share trade being directly reported to the public 
tape. The second approach, exemplified by Robinhood and Drivewealth, 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038363R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

does  result  in  public  reporting  to  the  tape.  We  do  not  here  weigh  in 
regarding  whether  there  is  an  economic  or  legal  distinction  between 
these two approaches. We do note, however, that the market currently 
has  no  specific  information  about  fractional  share  trades.  Our  paper 
provides  a  framework  for  how  to  identify  a  large  segment  fractional 
share trades during our sample period, but it will, of course, only capture 
the reportable trades. 

The  first  approach  to  fractional  share  trading  treats  the  fractional 
share trade as merely an accounting entry on the books and records of a 
brokerage firm, and thus not a “trade”  or “transaction.”  For instance, 
brokerage firms such as SoFi and Betterment clear trades using Apex, 
which  has facilitated fractional share trading  since  late 2018.7  Under 
this approach, if SoFi seeks to execute a fractional buy for 3.2 shares of 
an issuer on behalf of a customer, Apex will execute this transaction by 
“rounding up”  and purchasing four shares of the stock in the market. 
Apex then allocates 3.2 shares to SoFi’s account and 0.8 shares to Apex’s 
“fractional inventory account” that it manages through its proprietary 
trading  desk.8  As  a  result,  the  trade  appears  in  the  consolidated  tape 
(and therefore the TAQ data) as a trade for four shares, but to the best of 
our  knowledge  no  subsequent  transactional  report  is  made  for  the 
fractional  share  trade  allocation.  Nor  is  there  a  means  to  distinguish 
between  whole  share  trades  in  the  consolidated  tape  that  include  a 
fractional share trade component from those that do not.9 

The second approach to fractional share trading involves a broker 
executing a fractional share trade on a principal basis, much like a retail 
market maker might internalize a whole share trade. This approach to 
fractional  share  trading  is  utilized  by  Robinhood,  Fidelity,  Charles 
Schwab, Interactive Brokers, and likely others, including the back-end 
brokerage firm Drivewealth.10  Through its customizable suite of APIs, 
Drivewealth is the brokerage firm behind “micro-investing”  platforms 
such  Revolut  and  Cash-App  that  allow  their  customers  to  trade  in 

7  See 

https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20181023005447/en/, 

last accessed February 3, 2023.  

8  Details concerning Apex’s method for executing fractional share trades are 
provided  in  the  registration  statement  relating  to  its  (aborted)  2021  merger 
with Northern Star Investment Corp. II. See Northern Star Investment Corp. II, 
Amendment  No.  2  to  Form  S-4  (filed  May  24,  2021).  As  noted  there,  “Apex 
Fintech  does  not  execute  fractional  share  orders  against  its  own  inventory. 
When  executing  customer  orders  for  fractional  shares,  after  validating  the 
order,  Apex  Fintech  rounds  the  orders  to  the  next  whole  share  and  sends  a 
market  (or  limit,  depending  on  the  customer  order  received)  order  to  the 
market.  When  the  order  is  filled,  the  shares  received  are  placed  into  Apex 
Fintech’s fractional inventory account, whereby Apex Fintech then allocates the 
fractional shares to the customer’s account and moves the residual, or other-
wise  unallocated  fractional  share,  to  Apex  Fintech’s  own  inventory  account. 
Apex Fintech’s inventory account is managed by the Apex Fintech trading desk. 
Typically, when the whole share quantities exceed internal quantity or notional 
thresholds, Apex Fintech reduces its positions to ensure Apex Fintech does not 
carry excessive risk.” 

9 Fractional  share  trades  executed  in  this  fashion  also  do  not  appear  sepa-
rately in the OTC Transparency data. Whether this non-reporting approach to 
fractional share trading is congruent with FINRA’s trade reporting requirements 
seems to be a question for FINRA. But it clearly obscures the total amount of 
fractional  share  trading  in  the  market.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  argued 
elsewhere (Bartlett, McCrary, O’Hara 2022) that FINRA’s “rounding-up”  rule-
—which results in each fractional share trade being reported as a whole share 
trade on the consolidated tape and on the OTC Transparency platform—distorts 
the volume reported to the tape.  
10  See,  e.g.,  Fidelity,  https://www.fidelity.com/trading/fractional-shares 
(“When processing fractional and dollar-based orders, Fidelity Brokerage Ser-
vices (FBS) will act as agent and National Financial Services (NFS) will act in a 
mixed capacity (as principal for the fractional share components and as agent 
for  the  whole  share  components)  when  executing  an  order.”);  Drivewealth, 
https://legal.drivewealth.com/fractional-shares-disclosure  (“When  executing 
on a Principal Basis, DriveWealth will execute the fractional component of the 
order against its principal facilitation account.”) 

fractional  shares  and/or  invest  their  “spare  change”  in  fractional 
shares.11 

Critically,  because  a  firm  using  the  second  approach  executes  a 
fractional share trade against its own inventory, each fractional share 
trade must be reported separately to a FINRA trade reporting facility, 
just as each trade internalized by a retail market maker must be reported 
to a FINRA trade reporting facility.12 Moreover, these brokers’ customer 
agreements  additionally  provide  that  a  trade  involving  both  whole 
shares and fractional share trades (e.g., a trade for 3.2 shares, as in the 
above example) will be split into a whole share component and a frac-
tional component, with the whole share component being executed on 
an agency basis. For this reason, the executing broker will typically be 
required  to  report  a  separate  transaction  record  for  the  fractional 
component of the trade, as well as a transaction report for the whole 
share component. 

Yet,  while  each  fractional  share  trade  executed  using  the  second 
approach should be reported to the consolidated tape, actually identi-
fying these fractional share trades faces a new challenge: the “rounding- 
up  rule.”  Specifically,  as documented in Bartlett  et  al. (2022),  FINRA 
requires  all  fractional  share  trades  to  be  “rounded  up”  to  the  nearest 
whole share, even if the fraction in question is genuinely tiny, such as 
one-millionth. This appears to reflect a preference for the status quo as 
the  current  consolidated  reporting  system  only  has  the  capacity  to 
accept  transaction  reports  for  whole  shares.  As  a  result,  a  researcher 
looking solely at the consolidated tape for evidence of fractional share 
trades faces an immediate problem: How can she distinguish between 
those single share trades that represent fractional share trade executions 
from those that represent whole share executions? 

In contrast to the first approach to fractional share trading, however, 
this second approach subjects these fractional share trades to additional 
public disclosures arising from FINRA’s OTC Transparency initiative. In 
this paper, we exploit these additional disclosures to build two classifi-
cation  rules  for  identifying  trade  reports  within  the  NYSE  TAQ  data 
during our sample period that are likely to reflect fractional share trades 
executed by the two most active brokers using the second approach to 
fractional share trading—Robinhood and Drivewealth.13 

2.2. The OTC transparency initiative 

In 2016, FINRA launched a program to provide enhanced, publicly- 
available  information  about  non-exchange  trading  activity.  In  partic-
ular, because all non-exchange trades are reported to the consolidated 
tape with the same FINRA “D” venue code, the new OTC Transparency 
initiative was designed to provide greater insight into trading volume 
that occurs off exchanges in either an Alternative Trading Systems (ATS) 

11  For instance, Revolut will “round up” credit card transactions to the nearest 
whole increment, placing the difference between the rounded-up number and 
the  actual  credit  card  charge  into  a  savings  account  that  can  be  invested  in 
fractional shares. Formally, platforms  such as Revolut and Cash-App serve as 
“introducing brokers” and DriveWealth serves as the broker that executes and 
clears trades.  
12  The SEC has required since March 2007 that all off-exchange transactions 
be reported to a formal FINRA-managed Trade Reporting Facility. As described 
by  O’Hara  and  Ye  (2011),  this  requirement  means  that  off-exchange  trades 
made through a broker-dealer internalizer or in a dark pool (both of which were 
historically reported to an exchange and then consolidated with the exchanges’ 
own  trades  when  reported)  are  now  effectively  segregated  and  reported  as 
having been executed at a FINRA TRF.  
13  As  described  below,  the  data  fields  submitted  to  the  OTC  (non-ATS) 
Transparency  data  include  total  trades  and  total  shares  (after  application  of 
FINRA’s “rounding up” rule). This allows us to isolate those entities focused on 
fractional  share  trading,  as  the  ratio  of  the  two  is  for  many  entities  almost 
exactly one. Inarguably, such entities are focused on fractional share trading. Of 
those entities, Robinhood and Drivewealth constitute about 80 percent of the 
reported volume during our sample period. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038364R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

or  by  a  retail  market  maker.  Under  this  program,  FINRA  uses  the 
transaction reports that it receives from broker-dealers to assemble and 
publish on its website weekly summaries of non-exchange trading in U. 
S.  equities.  Among  other  things,  these  weekly  summaries  include  the 
total number of trades and shares executed by each FINRA member on a 
stock-by-stock basis for trades executed on an ATS and for trades that are 
internalized  by  a market maker.14  Because of FINRA’s  “rounding up” 
rule, these trades include fractional share executions internalized by a 
retail brokerage firm. 

There are, however, two potential limitations to using these data to 
estimate  the  incidence  of  fractional  share  trading  among  brokers 
adopting the second approach to fractional share trading. (Brokers that 
adopt the first approach to fractional share trading do not appear at all in 
the OTC Transparency data for their fractional share trades.) The first 
relates to the “de minimis” trading threshold that applies to the disclo-
sures.15  Specifically, weekly trades will not be attributed to a specific 
FINRA  member  and  will  instead  be  aggregated  and  reported  as 
completed by “De Minimis Firms” if either (a) the trades were executed 
by a FINRA member who executed fewer than 200 transactions per day 
for the reporting week, or (b) the trades were completed by a FINRA 
member who executed on average fewer than 200 transactions per day 
in  the  particular  security  during  the  week.  In  other  words,  a  FINRA 
member must execute 1,000 or more transactions in a security over a 5- 
day trading week for the firm to be disclosed as trading that security in 
the OTC Transparency data. 

Second,  because  the  OTC  Transparency  data  are  based  on  trades 
reported to the tape, a fractional share execution that is not reported to 
the tape as a whole share trade will not appear in the OTC Transparency 
data either. This can occur for both legitimate and illegitimate reasons. 
The  primary  cause  with  respect  to  the  former  are  riskless  principal 
transactions. Discussions with Robinhood personnel indicate that Rob-
inhood fills fractional share executions from its existing inventory (i.e., 
it  does  not  take  a  short  position).  If  a  subsequent  fractional  share 
execution  would  exhaust  this  inventory,  Robinhood  will  typically 
execute  the  trade  as  a  riskless-principal  (RP)  transaction,  filling  the 
order on a principal basis but simultaneously placing an order to buy a 
whole  share  with  a  market  center.  In  this  situation,  FINRA  trade 
reporting  rules  provide  that  a  broker  can  leave  the  trade  reporting 
obligation to the market center that executes the second leg of the trade. 
(FINRA Rule 6380B(d)(3)(B)). As a result, fractional share executions 
that happen to exhaust a broker’s inventory will be reported in both the 
tape and the OTC Transparency data as having been  executed by the 
market  center.  This  reporting  rule  means  that  the  OTC  Transparency 
data will underreport fractional share trades that trigger the RP trans-
action for the broker. Although the incidence of such trades is likely to 
be  random  across  trades  in  a  particular  stock,  it  may  happen  more 
frequently with lower priced stocks where the fractional component of a 
trade is more likely to be closer to 1. In all of our empirical tests below, 
we therefore include specifications with stock fixed effects.16 

Relatedly, a fractional share execution may not be reported to FINRA 
due  to  noncompliance  with  the  reporting  rule.  This  issue  has  special 
significance in the context of fractional share trading because neither 
Robinhood  nor  Drivewealth  appear  to  have  understood  FINRA’s 
reporting rules for fractional share executions until well after they began 
their fractional share trading programs. Indeed, as discussed in Bartlett 

14  See FINRA Regulatory Notice 15-48, Equity Trading Initiatives: OTC Equity 
Trading  Volume,  available  at  https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/Re 
gulatory-Notice-15-48.pdf.  
15  OTC Transparency (ATS and Non-ATS), Data Website User Guide January 
16, 2019 Version 4, available at https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/OTC 
-transparency-website-user-guide-v5.pdf  
16  In our primary empirical analyses in Section 4, we additionally test whether 
our results our robust to restricting our sample to stocks having a VWAP during 
our sample period of no less than $100. 

et  al.  (2022),  Robinhood  expressly  acknowledged  this  reporting 
deficiency—as  well  as  its  efforts  to  rectify  it,  upon  being  notified  by 
FINRA of its obligations—in its 2021 initial public offering. While we are 
not aware of a similar statement for Drivewealth, we provide evidence 
below  indicating  that  Drivewealth  also  did  not  make  real  time  trade 
reports to a FINRA trade reporting facility until October 2021—several 
months after it apparently commenced fractional share trading. 

This challenge of noncompliance is greatly diminished, however, by 
the fact that unlike the consolidated tape data, the OTC Transparency 
data  can  be  back-filled  to  correct  errors,  and  both  Robinhood  and 
Drivewealth have been in the process of a post facto correction to their 
OTC Transparency data. Our analysis below indicates that this process 
has been largely completed by Robinhood as of this writing, whereas the 
process  for  Drivewealth  remains  on-going.  Therefore,  we  exercise 
caution when we encounter a stock-week in the OTC Transparency data 
that lacks an entry for Drivewealth trades, as the absence of trades does 
not  necessarily  mean  that  Drivewealth  executed  no  fractional  share 
trades  in  that  security.  We  additionally  show  below  how  our  classifi-
cation rules can be used to validate whether the OTC Transparency data 
has been fully updated. 

Notwithstanding these limitations, the OTC Transparency data pro-
vide novel insight into the growth of fractional share trading in today’s 
equity market. The FINRA data separate trades made by ATS venues and 
other off exchange trading venues (or what FINRA designates as “OTC 
(Non-ATS).”) This latter category includes internalized trades by retail 
market  makers.  Until  2019,  the  non-ATS  category  was  dominated  by 
retail  market  makers  such  as  Citadel  Securities  and  Virtu.  Starting  in 
2019 and 2020, however, the composition of firms listed in these dis-
closures  began  to  include  retail  brokerage  firms  as  they  commenced 
fractional share trading programs. For instance, in Fig. 1, we plot the 
natural  log  of  the  aggregate  weekly  number  of  trades  disclosed  by 
Citadel Securities LLC and Virtu Americas LLC between January 1, 2019 
and  March  31,  2022,  as  well  as  the  top  six  retail  brokerage  firms  by 
trades reported in March 2022. Review of the customer account agree-
ments for these brokerage firms confirms that each adopted the second 
approach to fractional share trading discussed previously, whereby the 
fractional portion of each trade is required to be disclosed to FINIRA as a 
whole share trade. That each brokerage firm appears in the OTC data 
shortly after it began offering fractional share trading further indicates 
that these trades likely reflect fractional share executions. 

The average trade size for trades reported by these retail brokerage 
firms provides additional evidence that these reported trades primarily 
reflect  fractional  share  trades.  In  Table  1,  we  present  the  aggregate 
number of trades and shares reported by each firm shown in Fig. 1 for 
the same time period. While both Citadel and Virtu had an average trade 
size across all reported trades of over 300 shares per trade, the average 
was close to 1.0 for each retail brokerage firm. 

2.3. Identifying RHDW fractional share trades in the TAQ data 

We exploit the large number of fractional share trades executed by 
Robinhood and Drivewealth between February 2021 and March 2022 to 
build a classification rule for identifying these trades for each firm in the 
TAQ data. For brevity, we describe the method by which we build our 
classification rules in Appendix A and focus here on providing a general 
overview of these rules, along with an assessment of their accuracy. For 
researchers  interested  in  adopting  this  framework,  we  also  discuss 
concerns  connected  with  the  robustness  of  our  approach  beyond  our 
sample period due to technological changes in the market and how a 
researcher might validate our approach outside of our sample period to 
mitigate those concerns. 

In general, each classification rule is based on the fact that the trade 
reports in the TAQ data for the fractional share trades of Robinhood and 
Drivewealth  during  our  sample  period  should  have  a  number  of 
distinctive characteristics. For instance, as we show in Appendix A, these 
trades should appear as single share executions in one of three FINRA 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038365R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

in  TSLA.  For  instance,  during  2020—a  year  when  presumably  few,  if 
any, fractional share trades were reported as single share trades—there 
were approximately 75,000 single share, non-exchange trades in TSLA 
on  any  given  trading  day.  The  large  number  of  non-fractional,  single 
share  FINRA  trades  thus  complicates  identifying  those  single  share 
FINRA trades that are actually fractional share executions. 

As shown in Fig. 2, however, our classification rules perform well 
even  in  this  trading  environment.  After  Robinhood  began  reporting 
fractional  share  trades  to  the  tape  in  mid-February  2021,  the  weekly 
estimate for Robinhood fractional share trades in Panel A of Fig. 2 is 
roughly 90% of the weekly numbers disclosed in the OTC Transparency 
data. In Panel B, the estimates for Drivewealth’s fractional share trades 
commencing  with  October  7,  2021—the  date  Drivewealth  appears  to 
have begun reporting trades to the tape—are even more closely aligned 
to  those  disclosed  for  Drivewealth  in  the  OTC  Transparency  data. 
However,  whereas  the  estimates  for  Robinhood’s  trades  are  slightly 
below the OTC Transparency figures, the estimates for Drivewealth’s are 
slightly higher. Specifically, our Drivewealth estimates exceed the dis-
closures in the OTC Transparency data by an average of 6% each week. 
In the Appendix, we explain why the classification rule for Robinhood is 
likely  to  underestimate  slightly  the  actual  number  of  fractional share 
trades executed by Robinhood, while it is likely to overestimate slightly 
the number for Drivewealth. 

We additionally examine the cross-sectional performance of our two 
classifiers for all stock-weeks in the OTC Transparency Data where the 
reported trades and reported shares traded were the same number for 
either  Robinhood  or  Drivewealth.  Given  that  Robinhood’s  fractional 
share trades do not appear in the TAQ data until February 16, 2021, we 
confine our Robinhood analysis to the week of March 1, 2021 through 
the  week  of  March  28,  2022.  For  Drivewealth,  we  similarly  use  the 
weeks from November 1, 2021 through March 28, 2022 to ensure that 
we  capture TAQ data  during  a  time when  Drivewealth  was  reporting 
fractional  share  trades  to  the  tape.  With  these  restrictions,  our  data 
consist of 14,568 stock-weeks for Robinhood and 5,229 stock-weeks for 
Drivewealth. 

As shown in Fig. 3, both classifiers perform well in estimating the 
number of trades reported by Robinhood and Drivewealth in the OTC 
Transparency data. In Panel A of Fig. 3, we present a simple scatter plot 
of  the  number  of  weekly  trades  reported  for  Robinhood  in  the  OTC 
Transparency data for each stock-week against the weekly estimate of 
these trades after applying our Robinhood classifier to the TAQ trade 
data.  Panel  B  presents  the  same  Fig.  for  Drivewealth.  Overall,  both 
panels  indicate  a  nearly  one-for-one  correspondence  between  the 
weekly estimate of trades and disclosed trades for both firms. 

In Table 2, we estimate this relationship directly by regressing the 
weekly trades disclosed for each stock-week on the weekly estimates for 
each firm. Column 1 presents the estimates for Robinhood, while Col-
umn  2  presents  the  estimates  for  Drivewealth.  For  Robinhood,  the 
regression yields a precisely estimated coefficient of 1.055, consistent 
with our observation above that our Robinhood classifier slightly un-
derestimates  the  disclosed  number  of  Robinhood  trades.  For  Driv-
ewealth, the regression likewise yields a precisely estimated coefficient 
of 0.930, indicating that, on average, our Drivewealth classifier slightly 
overestimates the number of disclosed trades for the firm. In both cases, 
our  two  classification  rules  capture  almost  all  of  the  cross-sectional 
variation  in  fractional  share  trading  by  Robinhood  and  Drivewealth, 
as reflected in the very high R-squared of 0.993 and 0.996, respectively. 

3. Who uses fractional shares? RHDW fractional share trades in 
the cross section 

A natural question to ask is whether fractional share trades matter. If 
retail traders use fractional share trades primarily to purchase a fraction 
of  out-of-reach,  high-priced  stocks,  the  incidence  of  fractional  share 
trades should be confined to only a small portion of U.S. equity secu-
rities.  On  the  other  hand,  the  emergence  of  fractional  share  trading 

Fig. 1. Weekly Trades Reported to FINRA by Brokerage Firm. 
This figures plots the natural log of the total number of trades reported on a 
weekly basis to the FINRA OTC Transparency Data between January 1, 2019 
and March 31, 2022. The data are identified by brokerage firm. 

Table 1 
This table reports the total trades and shares disclosed in the OTC Transparency 
Data between January 2019 and March 31, 2022 for the following eight brokers.  

Reporting Firm 

Citadel Securities LLC 
Virtu Americas LLC 
Robinhood Securities, LLC 
Drivewealth, LLC 
National Financial 
Services LLC 

Trades 
(millions) 

2,266.31 
1,726.71 
245.11 
112.68 
25.41 

Alpaca Securities LLC 
Charles Schwab & Co., 

4.21 
0.88 

Inc. 

Interactive Brokers LLC 

0.15 

Shares 
(millions) 

759,419.10 
566,778.40 
257.05 
112.68 
27.72 

4.27 
1.48 

0.15 

Average Trade 
Size 

335.09 
328.24 
1.05 
1.00 
1.09 

1.01 
1.68 

1.00  

trade  reporting  facilities  (TRFs).  More  importantly,  each  trade  report 
reflects the time it takes for a broker to report the trade to one of two 
Securities  Information  Processors,  and  as  we  show  in  Appendix  A, 
fractional  share  trades  executed  by  both  Robinhood  and  Drivewealth 
had  distinctively  long  trade  reporting  latencies  during  our  sample 
period. As such, by examining the tail of the distribution of reporting 
latencies  for  single  share  FINRA  trades  before  and  after  these  firms 
commenced reporting trades to the tape, we estimate the latency dis-
tributions for fractional share trades executed by each firm. 

To assess the accuracy of the classification rules, we turn to the OTC 
Transparency  data.  In  conventional  predictive  modelling,  classifiers 
such as the ones we construct would be validated against a test dataset of 
trades that are known to have the target characteristic of interest (e.g., 
RH=0/1). We lack access to such a dataset, but the OTC Transparency 
data provides a useful substitute for those stock-weeks where Robinhood 
or Drivewealth disclosed trades. In particular, if the OTC Transparency 
data reveal that either Robinhood or Drivewealth executed only single 
share trades in a particular security during a trading week, the firm’s 
weekly trades in that security likely reflect fractional share trade exe-
cutions. We therefore evaluate the extent to which applying our classi-
fiers  to  the  TAQ  trade  data  results  in  weekly  trade  estimates  for 
Robinhood and Drivewealth for a stock that match their disclosures for 
these stock-weeks in the OTC Transparency data. 

In Fig. 2, we illustrate this approach using trades in Tesla (TSLA). 
Trades  in  TSLA  were  the  most  common  trades  disclosed  in  the  OTC 
Transparency data for both brokers, with Robinhood reporting over 14 
million total trades between January 1, 2020 and the week of March 28, 
2022 and Drivewealth reporting over 8 million during the same time 
period. Moreover, non-fractional single share FINRA trades are common 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038366R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 2. Fractional Share Trades in TSLA Reported in the OTC Transparency Data for Robinhood (Panel A) and Drivewealth (Panel B) Versus the Fractional 
Share Trades Estimated by the Robinhood and Drivewealth Classifiers. 

Fig.  3. Fractional  Share  Trades  Reported  in  the  OTC  Transparency  Data  for  Robinhood  (Panel  A)  and  Drivewealth  (Panel  B)  Versus  Fractional  Share 
Trades Estimated in TAQ with the Robinhood and Drivewealth Classifiers. 

enables retail brokerage firms to offer investors the ability to enter or-
ders based on the dollar value of the trade rather than the number of 
shares to be traded. Indeed, the default method for entering trades on 
both  Robinhood  and  Cash-App  (a  Drivewealth  application)  is  to  use 
dollars and cents rather than shares, and as noted, many applications 
that rely on Drivewealth specifically allow users to “round up”  credit 
card transactions to invest the rounded-up portion in stocks. If investors 

enter orders based on their dollar value, the resulting trade will likely 
involve a fractional share component, increasing the incidence of frac-
tional  share  trades  across  stocks  of  all  prices.  More  generally,  these 
fractional share trades would be indicative of a particular type of retail 
order  flow—i.e.,  trades  originating  from  a  mobile-first  application 
entered in dollar values—that may differ from broader measures of retail 
order flow. 

Table 2 
This table evaluates the accuracy of the classification rules for identifying fractional share trades executed by Robinhood and Drivewealth. Column 1 presents estimates 
from a regression of the total number of weekly trades reported for Robinhood in the OTC Transparency data on the total number of fractional share trades estimated to 
be executed by Robinhood using the TAQ trade data and the Robinhood classification rule. Column 2 presents estimates for the same regression applied to Drivewealth 
disclosures in the OTC Transparency data and using the Drivewealth classification rule. The sample period for Column 1 reflects the weeks commencing on March 1, 
2021 through the week of March 28, 2022, and the sample period for Column 2 reflects the weeks commencing on November 1, 2021 through the week of March 28, 
2022. Robust standard errors are included in brackets.   

(1) 
Robinhood Disclosed Weekly Trades 

(2)  
Drivewealth Disclosed Weekly Trades 

Weekly Estimates From TAQ 

Constant 

Observations 
R-squared 

*** p<0.01. 

1.055*** 
[0.00899] 
-152.4*** 
[45.05] 
14,568 
0.993 

0.930***  
[0.00657] 
-387.2***  
[31.31] 
5,229 
0.996  

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038367R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

To assess the prevalence of RHDW fractional share trading, we focus 
our analysis on trading in the common stock of all U.S. firms contained 
in the daily stock file maintained by the Center for Research on Secu-
rities  Prices  (CRSP).  Because  neither  Robinhood  nor  Drivewealth  re-
ported fractional share trades to the tape prior to February 15, 2021, our 
sample consists of all trading days between March 1, 2021 and March 
31,  2022.  After  filtering  for  securities  having  a  share  code  of  “11” 
(representing  common  equity  of  a  U.S.  corporate  issuer)  and  after 
excluding stock-days with no trades, the sample consists of 1,160,627 
stock-days, comprised of 4,648 stocks issued by 4,601 firms. For each 
issuer, we also collect bi-monthly short interest data using the CRSP/ 
COMPUSTAT merged file. Lastly, we merge onto each stock-day the total 
number of Robinhood and Drivewealth trades observed for the stock- 
day within the TAQ data based on the classification rules described in 
Section 2.17 

In  Table  3,  we  present  a  list  of  the  30  securities  with  the  largest 
number  of  fractional  share  trades  executed  by  Robinhood  and  Driv-
ewealth. In the table, as well as in our subsequent analyses, we combine 
trades of both brokers given the strong correlation in trading behavior 
associated  with  the  two  platforms.  In  particular,  for  trades  between 
October  7,  2021  and  March  31,  2022  (a  time  period  when  we  can 
identify fractional share trades for both platforms), both Robinhood’s 
fractional share trades and Drivewealth’s fractional share trades were 
highly concentrated in a select group of stocks. Indeed, during this time 
period the top 9 stocks by number of fractional share trades for Robin-
hood were identical to the top 9 stocks by number of fractional share 
trades for Drivewealth, with these 9 stocks constituting 24% of Robin-
hood’s  fractional  share  trades  and  29%  of  Drivewealth’s.18  Likewise, 
extending  the  ranking  to  each  firm’s  top  100  stocks  captures  55%  of 
Robinhood’s fractional share trades and 65% of Drivewealth’s fractional 
share trades, and trading in these top 100 stocks was also remarkably 
similar across platforms. For instance, taking the union of Robinhood’s 
top  100  stocks  and  Drivewealth’s  top  100  stocks  and  regressing  the 
percent of Robinhood’s total fractional share trading in each stock on the 
percent  of  Drivewealth’s  total  fractional  share  trading  in  each  stock 
produces a coefficient of 0.82 (robust s.e.=0.69) and an R2 of 0.92.19As 
we  discuss  below,  that  traders  using  these  app-based  platforms 
concentrate their trades in such a small number of stocks distinguishes 
this form of retail order flow from retail trading proxied by the BJZZ 
metric which is more diffusely distributed across the universe of stocks. 
Focusing  on  the  combined  results,  Table  3  reveals  that  across  the 
entire sample period, TSLA has the largest number of RHDW fractional 

17  Efforts to match stocks-days from CRSP to stock-days in TAQ using the Daily 
TAQ  CRSP  Link  available  through  CRSP  resulted  in  an  incomplete  match  of 
stock-days between these data. Often, this was due to the fact that while stock 
symbols  often  change  due  to  corporate  reorganizations  and  mergers,  the 
PERMNO associated with a company’s equity securities in CRSP typically re-
mains the same. Where the link file failed to produce a confirmed match, we 
matched  PERMNO-DATE  observations  in  CRSP  to  SYM_ROOT-SYM_SUFFIX- 
DATE  observations  in  TAQ  by  means  of  hand-matching  combinations. 
Through this method, we match 100% of the 1,160,627 PERMNO-DATES to a 
SYM_ROOT-SYM_SUFFIX-DATE  observation  in  TAQ.  Specifically,  the  4,648 
PERMNOs observed in our CRSP data were associated with 4830 SYM_ROOT- 
SYM_SUFFIX observations in our TAQ data.  
18  For Robinhood, the top 9  stocks by percent of total Robinhood fractional 
share trades during this time period were: TSLA (7.6%), AAPL (3.0%), AMZN 
(2.8%),  MSFT  (2.0%),  AMC  (1.9%),  NVDA  (1.9%),  FB  (1.9%)  and  GOOG.L 
(1.4%), and LCID (1.3%). For Drivewealth, the top 9 stocks by percent of total 
Drivewealth fractional share trades during the same period were: TSLA (8.3%), 
AAPL  (4.6%),  AMZN  (3.6%),  AMC  (3.1%),  FB  (2.3%),  MSFT  (2.1%),  NVDA 
(2.0%), GOOG.L (1.3%), and LCID (1.3%).  
19  Across  the  full  sample  of  stock-days  during  this  time  period,  a  simple 
bivariate  regression  of  the  number  of  Robinhood  fractional  trades  on  the 
number of Drivewealth fractional share trades yields a coefficient of 1.2 (robust 
s.e.=0.02) and an R2  of 0.79. 

share  trades.  Column  (4)  indicates  that  during  the  sample  period 
roughly 6.7% of all trades in Tesla were fractional share executions by 
Robinhood or Drivewealth, based on our classification rules. Moreover, 
Columns  (5)  and  (6)  underscore  the  importance  of  fractional  share 
trading in understanding the large number of single share trades now 
reported for most issuers. In the case of TSLA, fractional share execu-
tions  by  Robinhood  and  Drivewealth  accounted  for  over  26%  of  all 
single  share  trades  in  the  market,  and  a  remarkable  47.8%  of  single 
share trades reported to FINRA. Nor is this phenomenon limited to Tesla; 
across all 30 stocks in Table 3, RHDW fractional share trades accounted 
for between 16% to 40% of all reported single share trades and between 
31% and 50% of all reported single share FINRA trades. We return to this 
issue in Section 5 when we discuss the distortions to the consolidated 
tape caused by the current rules for fractional share trade reporting. 

More generally, the high ranking of TSLA in Table 3 suggests frac-
tional share trading should be especially common in high-priced stocks 
that are popular among retail traders. As shown in column (1), Tesla had 
an average stock price of over $800 during the sample period. Likewise, 
using data from 2018 through August 2020 provided by Robintrack.net 
(which tracked the number of Robinhood accounts holding a particular 
stock),  Welch  (2021)  finds  that  Tesla  was  a  common  stock  held  by 
Robinhood  investors.  In  addition  to  TSLA,  Table  3  reveals  that  retail 
traders  also  used  fractional  share  trading  to  access  other  high-priced 
stocks such as GOOG.L and AMZN, both of which had prices in excess 
of $2,000 per share. The popularity of fractional share trading in these 
stocks is consistent with Da et al. (2024), who find that the introduction 
of fractional share trading eased access to high-priced stocks for retail 
investors with capital constraints. 

However,  Table  3  also  reveals  that  fractional  share  trading  is  not 
confined to the most expensive stocks. For instance, the second stock on 
the list is AMC Entertainment, an especially noteworthy “meme” stock 
whose stock price ranged between $9 per share and $59 per share during 
the sample period: in other words, not expensive. Overall, Table 3 in-
cludes just four stocks (Tesla, Amazon, Netflix, and the class A shares of 
Alphabet)  with  an  average  stock  price  of  $500  or  more  during  the 
sample  period.  The  remainder  of  the  list  is  largely  dominated  by 
“household”  companies  (such  as  Apple,  Disney,  Coca  Cola  Co.,  and 
Walmart), other “meme” stocks (such as Gamestop), and several recent 
IPOs (such as Rivian and Coinbase) and former Special Purpose Acqui-
sition Companies  (SPACs) (such as Virgin Galactic Holdings, Inc. and 
Lucid Group Inc.) that were reportedly popular among retail traders.20 
Moreover,  most  of  the  stocks  on  Table  3  had  stock  prices  during  the 
sample period that were just a fraction of the price of Tesla. For example, 
nine had an average stock price of less than $50 per share. 

Table  3  also  highlights  the  utility  of  having  a  direct  measure  for 
fractional  share  trading  rather  than  relying  on  the  number  of  single 
share,  off-exchange trades. As noted,  the  fraction of  single share,  off- 
exchange  trades  that  are  coded  as  RHDW  fractional  share  trades 
ranges  from  31%  (Advanced  Micro  Devices)  to  49.6%  (Robinhood 
Markets). Likewise, across all issuers in the sample, the correlation of the 
daily  number  of  RHDW  fractional  share  trades  and  whole  share,  off- 
exchange trades ranges from as low as 0.005 for a stock like Genera-
tions Bancorp of New York (where few whole share, off-exchange trades 
are RHDW fractional share trades) to as high as 0.996 for the Class A 
shares  of  Berkshire  Hathaway  (where  over  90%  of  whole  share,  off- 
exchange trades are RHDW fractional share trades). 

Perhaps most important, while single share, off exchange trades will 
always be a superset of RHDW fractional share trades, the extent of the 
difference can exhibit time-varying properties for individual stocks. As 

20 See,  e.g,  Isabelle  Lee,  “SPACs  are  booming  ’at  the  expense  of  retail  in-
vestors’, and regulators should take these 5 steps to fix the market, think tanks 
say”, Business Insider, March 7, 2021, available at https://markets.businessinsi 
der.com/news/stocks/spac-boom-sec-retail-investors-blank-check-companies 
-regulation-2021-3-1030157257. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038368R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 3 
This table provides summary statistics of the incidence of trades classified as RHDW fractional shares for the thirty stocks having the most estimated RHDW fractional 
share trades in the sample. Sample period is March 1, 2021 through March 31, 2022. Average Trade Price is the mean of the daily closing price. Average Daily Dollar 
Volume of Trades is the mean daily dollar value of trades in the stock. Estimated Total of RHDW Fractional Share Trades is the total number of trades that are classified 
as RHDW fractional share trades. % of All Trades that Are RHDW Fractional is the percentage of all trades in the stock that are classified as RHDW fractional share 
trades. % of All 1-Share Trades that Are RHDW Fractional and % of All 1-Share Finra Trades that are RHDW Fractional show how the estimated number of RHDW 
fractional share trades compares to the total number of all single share trades and the total number of all single share trades executed in a non-exchange venue, 
respectively.    

Symbol 

Company 

(1) 
Average 
Trade Price 

(2) 
Average Daily Dollar 
Volume of Trades 

(3) 
Estimated Total of 
RHDW Fractional 
Share Trades 

(4) 
% of All Trades 
that Are RHDW 
Fractional 

(5) 
% of All 1-Share 
Trades that Are 
RHDW Fractional 

(6) 
% of All 1-Share Finra 
Trades that Are 
RHDW Fractional 

TSLA 
AMC 

AAPL 
AMZN 
GME 
MSFT 
NVDA 
FB 
DIS 
GOOG. 
L 
COIN 
NFLX 
F 
LCID 
AMD 

PYPL 
MRNA 
RBLX 
PFE 
SQ 
HOOD 

PLTR 

SNAP 
RIVN 

PLUG 
SPCE 

TESLA INC 
A M C ENTERTAINMENT 
HOLDINGS INC 
APPLE INC 
AMAZON COM INC 
GAMESTOP CORP NEW 
MICROSOFT CORP 
NVIDIA CORP 
META PLATFORMS INC 
DISNEY WALT CO 
ALPHABET INC 

COINBASE GLOBAL INC 
NETFLIX INC 
FORD MOTOR CO DEL 
LUCID GROUP INC 
ADVANCED MICRO 
DEVICES INC 
PAYPAL HOLDINGS INC 
MODERNA INC 
ROBLOX CORP 
PFIZER INC 
BLOCK INC 
ROBINHOOD MARKETS 
INC 
PALANTIR 
TECHNOLOGIES INC 
SNAP INC 
RIVIAN AUTOMOTIVE 
INC 
PLUG POWER INC 
VIRGIN GALACTIC 
HOLDINGS INC 
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO 
WALMART INC 
COCA COLA CO 
A T & T INC 

GE 
WMT 
KO 
T 
Total for top 30:   
Total for all other stocks:   
Total:    

$810.34 
$28.64 

$21,581,670,856 
$2,821,125,357 

13,264,642 
8,918,867 

$148.29 
$3,302.32 
$171.11 
$287.72 
$383.45 
$312.83 
$168.28 
$2,613.09 

$247.98 
$529.14 
$15.77 
$30.72 
$106.75 

$226.56 
$243.33 
$79.51 
$45.23 
$208.87 
$28.34 

$13,256,687,565 
$11330,798,966 
$1,206,605,773 
$8,123,896,821 
$8,987,993,532 
$6,685,390,250 
$1,736,073,977 
$4,085,268,091 

$1,475,070,044 
$2,342,057,797 
$1,376,251,033 
$1,651,483,019 
$7,054,108,294 

$2,366,783,535 
$3,287,727,482 
$1,228,872,541 
$1,533,329,905 
$2,143,315,317 
$514,864,839 

6,369,118 
5,479,697 
3,798,715 
3,360,176 
2,877,344 
2,766,069 
2,167,639 
2,042,176 

1,993,402 
1,914,795 
1,864,729 
1,504,676 
1,357,620 

1,325,034 
1,287,985 
1,287,839 
1,169,449 
1,132,934 
1,099,894 

$21.06 

$1,072,445,606 

1,098,672 

$56.40 
$80.82 

$29.56 
$22.27 

$66.09 
$141.27 
$56.19 
$27.05 

$1,250,242,881 
$1,971,504,115 

$763,692,279 
$572,564,241 

$8,083,343,72 
$1,161,726,783 
$9,111,160,71 
$1,221,178,586 

1,071,059 
1,067,488 

978,515 
976,517 

935,982 
915,973 
910,795 
888,539 
7,582,634,0 
1,189,202,02 
1,947,465,42 

6.7% 
5.4% 

3.4% 
10.5% 
8.0% 
3.3% 
2.4% 
3.2% 
5.3% 
7.6% 

6.5% 
5.8% 
3.3% 
3.0% 
1.1% 

2.5% 
2.6% 
3.2% 
2.4% 
2.7% 
4.9% 

1.7% 

2.5% 
4.3% 

2.1% 
2.5% 

2.7% 
3.7% 
3.3% 
2.1% 
4.0% 
1.1% 
1.5% 

26.4% 
39.7% 

27.0% 
26.2% 
29.1% 
22.6% 
16.2% 
21.9% 
26.9% 
18.1% 

27.1% 
25.2% 
34.9% 
29.4% 
16.1% 

17.6% 
19.9% 
24.2% 
28.4% 
19.6% 
39.0% 

23.6% 

29.7% 
28.1% 

26.9% 
27.7% 

28.3% 
27.0% 
26.7% 
22.6% 
25.8% 
10.1% 
13.2% 

47.8% 
48.7% 

41.5% 
46.0% 
41.1% 
41.3% 
35.6% 
41.4% 
43.2% 
41.4% 

43.1% 
49.1% 
44.3% 
48.7% 
31.0% 

35.0% 
38.8% 
41.9% 
42.0% 
35.9% 
49.6% 

35.9% 

49.3% 
45.4% 

46.3% 
43.1% 

45.4% 
44.4% 
42.3% 
33.7% 
43.4% 
30.8% 
34.7%  

an  example,  Fig.  4  plots  the  daily  percentage  of  off-exchange,  single 
share trades that are classified as RHDW fractional share trades for the 
common  stock  of  the  SPAC  Digital  World  Acquisition  Corp.  (DWAC) 
from September 30, 2021 (the first day the shares traded) through the 
end of the sample period. On October 21, 2021, DWAC announced its 
intention  to  merge  with  Trump  Media  &  Technology  Group  Corp.,  a 
company controlled by former president Donald Trump that planned to 
launch the social network TRUTH Social. The announcement resulted in 
a five-fold increase in DWAC’s stock price and a surge in trading activity. 
As  shown  in  the  figure,  the  increase  in  overall  trading  resulted  in  a 
sustained and significant decline in the extent to which single share, off- 
exchange trades reflected RHDW fractional share trades.21 

Lastly, Table 3 also indicates that fractional share trades are far from 
uniformly distributed across stocks. As shown in the last three rows of 

21  Within the OTC Transparency data, Robinhood and Drivewealth were the 
only  two  retail  brokerage  firms  listed  as  active  in  DWAC  during  this  time 
period,  which  rules  out  the  possibility  that  another  broker’s  fractional  share 
trades accounts for this decline. 

Fig.  4. Percent  of  Single  Share  FINRA  Trades  in  DWAC  that  Are  RHDW 
Fractional, September 1, 2021 – March 31, 2022. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038369R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 4 
This table summarizes the distribution of RHDW fractional share trades and the distribution of retail trades (calculated using the BJZZ metric) across sample stocks. For 
each stock in the sample, the total number of RHDW fractional share trades was estimated between March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2022 using the RH and DW 
classification rules, and stocks were ranked from highest to lowest by the total RHDW fractional shares for each stock. A similar ranking was conducted based on the 
total retail trades observed for each stock during this time period using the BJZZ metric. Top 50 refers to the 50 stocks that had the highest total number of trades for 
each ranking. Each subsequent row expands the sample by including additional stocks according to their position in the ranking. Percent of All RHDW Fractional Share 
Trades is the total number of RHDW fractional share trades represented by stocks in the group relative to all observed RHDW fractional share trades for the sample. 
Percent of All Retail Trades is the total number of retail trades (measured using the BJZZ metric) represented by sample stocks in the group relative to all observed retail 
trades proxied by the BJZZ metric for sample stocks.   

Group of Stocks 

Top 50 
Top 100 
Top 200 
Top 500 
Top 1000 
Top 2000 
Top 3000 

(1) 
Percent of All RHDW Fractional Share Trades 

(2) 
Percent of All BJZZ Retail Trades 

46.16% 
56.91% 
67.19% 
79.02% 
86.95% 
94.31% 
98.15% 

32.42% 
43.39% 
55.12% 
70.89% 
83.42% 
94.33% 
98.49% 

(3) 
Difference 

13.74% 
13.52% 
12.07% 
8.14% 
3.53% 
-0.02% 
-0.34%  

the table, RHDW fractional share trades in these thirty stocks accounted 
for 75.8 million of the roughly 195 million RHDW fractional share trades 
(39%) estimated to have been executed based on our classification rules. 
In Table 4, we expand this analysis to stocks beyond the “top 30” based 
on the ranking of stocks by the total number of RHDW fractional share 
trades.  Column  (1)  shows  that  including  the  top  100  stocks  captures 
nearly  60%  of  all  estimated  RHDW  fractional  share  trades,  while 
expanding the list of stocks to the top 500 captures nearly 80% of all 
such trades. Even though our sample includes over 4,600 stocks, Table 4 
indicates that focusing on just slightly less than half of the sample stocks 
would  nevertheless  capture  almost  95%  of  all  estimated  RHDW  frac-
tional  share  trades.  For  comparison,  we  also  calculate  the  number  of 
total  retail  trades  observed  for  each  stock  in  the  sample  during  the 
sample period based on the BJZZ metric and similarly rank stocks from 
highest to lowest by number of estimated retail trades. While the dis-
tribution of retail trades based on this metric is also skewed toward the 
top-ranked  stocks,  RHDW  fractional  share  trades  are  even  more 
concentrated among just a fraction of all stocks within the CRSP dataset. 
For instance, as shown in columns (2) and (3), where the “top 50” stocks 
in  the  RHDW  ranking  comprise  roughly  46%  of  all  observed  RHDW 
fractional  share  trades,  the  top  50  stocks  in  the  retail  trade  ranking 
comprise  only  32.42%  of  observed  retail  trades  based  on  the  BJZZ 
metric. Likewise, for the top 100, the figures are 56.91% versus 43.39%, 
and for the top 200, they are 67.19% versus 55.12%. 

What might induce investors to concentrate fractional share trades 
within such a subset of U.S. equity securities? Somewhat surprisingly, 
column (4) of Table 3 indicates that a high stock price appears to be only 
a partial explanation. While over 10% of all trades in Amazon (average 
stock  price=$3,302.32)  are  fractional  share  executions,  over  8%  of 
trades in Gamestop were also fractional share executions despite having 
an average stock price that was roughly 1/20th that of Amazon. 

In Fig. 5, we plot the average percent of daily trades in a security that 
are  RHDW  fractional  share  executions  within  the  sample  against  a 
stock’s average daily price. Due to skewness in both measures, we plot 
the relationship using the natural log of both measures. The figure has a 
number of distinctive features. First, the outlier in the top right quadrant 
represents the Class A common stock of Berkshire Hathaway (BRK.A), 
which had an average price of approximately $435,000 per share during 
our sample period. As shown in Bartlett et al. (2022), fractional share 
trades by Robinhood or Drivewealth represent roughly 80%-90% of all 
trades  in  BRK.A,  underscoring  the  critical  role  that  fractional  share 
trades  now  play  in  the  average  daily  volume  of  the  market’s  most 
expensive publicly-traded stock. However, the figure also reveals that 
the relationship between the incidence of fractional share trading and 
stock price is hardly straight-forward. Excluding BRK.A, the slope co-
efficient  on  a  regression  line  through  these  data  is  -0.02  (robust  std. 
error=0.009).  Indeed,  the  distinct,  vertical  cluster  of  firms  with  an 

average  closing  price  of  roughly  $10/share  (natural  log=$2.30)  in-
dicates  that  stock  price  may  often  be  orthogonal  to  fractional  share 
trading. This vertical cluster of stocks largely reflects the large number 
of SPACs launched during 2020 and 2021(for a discussion, see Klausner 
et al., 2021.) SPACs raise capital in an IPO and thereafter search for an 
acquisition target. Notably, these issuers are typically structured to trade 
at $10/share after their IPO until they acquire a firm, and they structure 
any subsequent acquisition to be completed at a stock price that values 
the SPAC’s securities at $10/share. While many of these stocks had very 
little fractional share trades, others ranked among the stocks with the 
highest  percentage  of  RHDW  fractional  share  trades  in  our  sample. 
Likewise, our sample also coincided with a large number of conventional 
IPOs  that  were  priced  at  less  than  $20/share,  but  their  trading  was 
associated  with  a  high  frequency  of  RHDW  fractional  share  trades. 
Overall,  among  the  87  stocks  where  RHDW  fractional  share  trades 
constituted  more  than  5%  of  all  trades,  nearly  half  (N=42)  had  an 
average closing price of less than $20/share. 

Aside  from  BRK.A,  the  absence  of  any  clear,  positive  relationship 
between  stock  price  and  RHDW  fractional  share  trades  in  Fig.  5  is 
consistent with RHDW fractional share trades arising from Robinhood 
and  Drivewealth  investors  commonly  entering  trades  for  an  overall 
dollar value (e.g., invest $1,000 total across these 3 stocks). To explore 
which types of stocks are likely to be of interest to this class of retail 
investors, we use our sample to estimate the following model:    

Fig. 5. RHDW Fractional Share Trading and Stock Price, March 1, 2021 – 
March 31, 2022. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383610R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

RHDWit = αit + BJZZit + priceit + mktcapit + newit + ageit + volatilityit + turnoverit + short interestit + tapeit + SPACit + Mentionsit + εit

(1)   

Our outcome variable RHDWit  is measured as the natural log of one 
plus the number of RHDW fractional share trades in stock i observed on 
day  t.22  Our  interest  is  in  why  retail  traders  at  Robinhood  and  Driv-
ewealth  use  fractional  share  trades  above  and  beyond  the  fact  that  a 
particular  stock  might  be  popular  among  retail  investors  using  the 
conventional  BJZZ  proxy  for  retail  trading.  We  therefore  include  the 
covariate BJZZit, which is an estimate of retail trades in stock i on day t 
that are executed by retail market makers using the BJZZ metric. This 
proxy  for  retail  trades  is  based  on  non-exchange  trades  having  sub- 
penny  price  improvement,  exclusive  of  midpoint  executions.23  As  we 
show below, fractional share trades executed by Robinhood are over-
whelmingly  at  the  midpoint,  and  those  executed  by  Drivewealth  are 
overwhelmingly executed with no price improvement. The BJZZ metric, 
therefore, does not include the vast majority of the fractional share ex-
ecutions in our sample. 

By controlling for BJZZ, the model establishes the following (sharp) 
null hypothesis for the remaining covariates: If RHDW fractional share 
trades were randomly distributed across trades flagged as retail using 
the  BJZZ  metric,  none  of  the  other  covariates  should  be  statistically 
associated with RHDW fractional share trades. These covariates are (for 
each stock i on day t) the natural log of the closing price (priceit), the 
natural log of market capitalization (mktcapit), an indicator for whether 
the stock has been traded for less than 180 calendar days (newit), the 
natural log of the number of days the stock has traded (ageit), the natural 
log of return volatility over the prior 30 days (volatilityit), the natural log 
of  the  volume  of  shares  traded  relative  to  total  shares  outstanding 
(turnoverit), the natural log of the most recent bi-monthly short-interest 
ratio (short interestit), and an indicator for stock exchange listing (tapeit). 
Additionally,  given  the  prominence  of  SPACs  and  “meme”  stocks  in 
Table 3, Eq. (1) also includes an indicator for whether stock i represents 
the common stock issued in a SPAC (SPACit) as well as the number of 
total mentions (Mentionsit) of stock i on day t on the “subreddit” forum r/ 
wallstreetbets, a popular retail discussion forum commonly associated 
with meme stock trading.24 

22 We use this transformation of the dependent variable because for approxi-
mately 5% of stock-day observations, the daily number RHDW fractional share 
trades is zero. While this transformation ensures that our estimates are based on 
the full sample of stocks, we are also aware of the need to exercise caution when 
interpreting the coefficient estimates in Table 5 as percentage effects based on 
Chen and Roth (2023). In our setting, defining RHDWit  as either the natural log 
of RHDW fractional share trades or as one plus this number makes no mean-
ingful  difference  to  our  results.  With  one  exception,  all  coefficient  estimates 
remain qualitatively and quantitively the same. The sole exception is that the 
coefficient  for  New  in  column  4  (which  is  indistinguishable  from  zero  in 
Table  5)  increases  to  a  statistically  significant  0.07  when  we  condition  on  a 
stock-day having at least one RHDW fractional share trade.  
23  The BJZZ metric was originally based on data from 2010 and is widely used 
in  the  literature.  More  recent  research,  discussed  in  Section  4,  argues  that 
changes  in  the  market  have  rendered  this  metric  less  accurate  in  classifying 
retail trades.  
24  See, e.g., Callum Keown, “Founder of WallStreetBets, Which Ignited Meme 
Stock Frenzy, Is Suing Reddit,” Barron’s, Feb. 16, 2023. Data for a stock’s daily 
mentions on r/wallstreetbets was obtained through Quiver Quantitative. Data 
for SPAC securities is from SPAC INSIDER, https://spacinsider.com/, which is 
the  same  source  for  SPAC  securities  used  in  Klausner,  Ohlrogge  and  Ruan 
(2022).  Securities  were  flagged  as  a  SPAC  from  the  date  of  the  SPAC’s  IPO 
through  the  date  of  its  “de-SPAC”  transaction,  if  any.  As  noted  in  Klausner, 
Ohlrogge  and  Ruan  (2022),  a  SPAC  must  typically  liquidate  after  two  years 
from  its  IPO  if  it  fails  to  complete  a  de-SPAC  transaction  within  that  time 
period; therefore, SPACs completing an IPO prior to 2019 were disregarded. 

Estimates  from  this  model  are  presented  in  Table  5.  Column  (1) 
provides estimates for the baseline model, while column (2) estimates 
the  same  model  with  date  fixed  effects.  For  both  models,  the  log-log 
specification  permits  coefficient  estimates  to  be  interpreted  as  the 
elasticity of RHDW fractional share trades with respect to the variable in 
question.  Not  surprisingly,  the  tightly  estimated  coefficients  for  BJZZ 
indicate that RHDW fractional share trades have a positive relation with 
retail order flow based on the BJZZ proxy; in particular, a 10% increase 
in the BJZZ proxy for retail order flow is associated with a 5.5% increase 
in RHDW fractional share trades. After controlling for BJZZ trades, the 
model reveals that a 10%  increase in stock price  is associated  with a 
roughly 1.3% increase in RHDW fractional share trades. Both of these 
results are consistent with fractional share trades being used by retail 
traders to access higher-priced stocks. 

At the same time, however, Table 5 highlights ways in which RHDW 
trades may also represent a form of order flow that is distinct from that 
captured  by  the  BJZZ  proxy.  For  instance,  the  model  indicates  that 
fractional share trades are especially common among larger capitaliza-
tion companies, as well as newly public companies. Indeed, even among 
companies  that  have  traded  for  more  than  six  months,  the  model  in-
dicates a negative relationship between fractional share trades and the 
length of time a company has publicly traded. Consistent with Welch 
(2021),  RHDW  fractional  share  trades  are  also  increasing  in  return 
volatility and trading turnover. Additionally, columns (1) and (2) indi-
cate  that  RHDW  fractional  share  trades  are  more  common  among 
Nasdaq-listed firms, as well as among stocks with higher levels of short 
interest,  suggesting  skepticism  among  short  sellers  about  the  stock’s 
value.  Lastly,  RHDW  fractional  share  trades  are  also  more  common 
among SPACs and the number of mentions a stock receives on r/wall-
streetbets.  In  particular,  columns  (1)  and  (2)  indicate  that  a  10%  in-
crease in the number of daily mentions of a stock on r/wallstreetbets is 
associated with a 3.8% increase in the number of daily RHDW fractional 
share trades. 

In column (3), we add stock fixed effects to examine how the daily 
changes in the level of RHDW fractional share trades within a stock were 
associated with changes in the model’s time-varying covariates. These 
within-stock  estimates  are  largely  consistent  with  the  between-stock 
estimates  for  retail  order  flow  using  the  BJZZ  proxy,  price,  market 
capitalization,  volatility,  turnover,  and  daily  mentions  on  r/wall-
streetbets. However, the coefficient signs are the opposite for a stock’s 
age and short-interest, though the negative coefficient for short-interest 
is not distinguishable from zero. 

Finally, given the predictive power of the covariates in Table 5 in 
addition to the BJZZ proxy, we additionally estimate two versions of Eq. 
(1) in which we drop BJZZit  as a parameter and use as our dependent 
variable  either  RHDWit  (in  column  4)  or  BJZZit  (in  column  5). 
Comparing the coefficient estimates across these two specifications of 
Eq. (1) confirms that retail trading as measured using RHDW fractional 
share  trades  differs  in  important  respects  from  retail  trades  proxied 
using  the  BJZZ  metric.  In  particular,  where  the  BJZZ  metric  suggests 
retail trading has a negative association with younger firms and Nasdaq- 
listed stocks, RHDW fractional share trading has the opposite association 
in both cases. Likewise, while the direction of the associations for price, 
market  capitalization,  volatility,  turnover,  short  interest,  SPACs,  and 
mentions  on  r/wallstreetbets  are  the  same,  RHDW  fractional  share 
trading has roughly 400% the positive effect size for short interest and 
155%  the  positive  effect  size  for  mentions  on  r/wallstreetbets.  In 
contrast, RHDW fractional share trading has just one-third the negative 
effect size for daily stock price, three-quarters the positive effect size for 
market capitalization, 60% of the positive effect size for turnover, and 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383611R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 5 
This table reports regression results for a model of daily RHDW fractional share trading and daily retail trading based on the BJZZ metric as a function of stock 
characteristics. The sample consists of the common stocks of all U.S. firms contained in CRSP, and the sample period is March 1, 2021 through March 31, 2022. All 
variables are measured for stock i on day t. The outcome in columns 1 through 4 is the natural log of one plus the daily number of RHDW fractional share trades. The 
outcome in column 5 is Ln(BJZZ), the natural log of the estimated number of daily retail trades based on the BJZZ metric. Ln(price) is the natural log of the daily closing 
price. Ln(mktcap) is the natural log of market capitalization. New is an indicator for whether the stock has traded for fewer than 180 calendar days. Ln(age) is the 
natural log of the number of days the stock has traded. Ln(volatility) is the natural log of the stock’s return volatility over the past thirty trading days. Ln(turnover) is the 
natural log of the volume of shares traded relative to the number of outstanding shares. Ln(short interest) is the natural log of the most recent bi-monthly short-interest 
ratio. SPAC is an indicator for whether stock i represents the common stock issued in a SPAC. Ln(mentions) is the number of total mentions of stock i on day t on the 
“subreddit” forum r/wallstreetbets. In columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) indicators are also included for stock exchange listing. Robust standard errors are included in 
brackets.   

Ln(BJZZ) 

Ln(price) 

Ln(mktcap) 

New 

Ln(age) 

Ln(volatility) 

Ln(turnover) 

Ln(short interest) 

Ex=NYSE MKT 

Ex=Nasdaq 

SPAC 

Ln(Mentions) 

Constant 

Date Fixed Effects: 
Stock Fixed Effects: 
Observations 
R-squared 
Number of stocks   

*** p<0.01. 

(1) 
Ln(RHDW) 

0.554*** 
[0.00126] 
0.128*** 
[0.00137] 
0.157*** 
[0.00133] 
0.0430*** 
[0.00440] 
-0.0545*** 
[0.000713] 
0.130*** 
[0.00123] 
0.0366*** 
[0.00144] 
0.0531*** 
[0.000860] 
-0.0554*** 
[0.00584] 
0.113*** 
[0.00196] 
0.0685*** 
[0.00670] 
0.378*** 
[0.00166] 
-2.018*** 
[0.0193] 
N 
N 
1,111,807 
0.731 

(2) 
Ln(RHDW) 

0.538*** 
[0.00127] 
0.133*** 
[0.00135] 
0.165*** 
[0.00133] 
0.0960***  
[0.00425]  
-0.0467*** 
[0.000694] 
0.140*** 
[0.00125] 
0.0712*** 
[0.00146] 
0.0483*** 
[0.000856] 
-0.0433***  
[0.00586]  
0.115***  
[0.00188]  
0.0284***  
[0.00657]  
0.385*** 
[0.00161] 
-2.121*** 
[0.0191] 
Y 
N 
1,111,807 
0.746 

(3) 
Ln(RHDW) 

0.434***    
[0.00448]   
0.161*** 
[0.0321] 
0.349*** 
[0.0292] 

0.243*** 
[0.0136] 
0.0855*** 
[0.00353] 
0.144*** 
[0.00593] 
-0.00701 
[0.00552] 

0.144*** 
[0.00675] 
-8.047*** 
[0.530] 
Y 
Y 
1,111,807 
0.243 
4,545    

(4) 
Ln(RHDW) 

(5)  
Ln(BJZZ) 

-0.225*** 
[0.00130] 
0.630*** 
[0.000884] 
0.00716 
[0.00474] 
-0.00930*** 
[0.000774] 
0.349*** 
[0.00127] 
0.443*** 
[0.00133] 
0.0645*** 
[0.000925] 
0.120*** 
[0.00607] 
0.0990*** 
[0.00217] 
-0.142*** 
[0.00675] 
0.599*** 
[0.00208] 
-6.933*** 
[0.0177] 
N 
N 
1,144,752 
0.685 

-0.676***  
-0.000954 
0.874***  
-0.000673 
-0.00203  
-0.00481 
0.0724***  
-0.000686 
0.353***  
-0.00123 
0.767***  
-0.00121 
0.0168***  
-0.000924 
0.304***  
-0.00488 
-0.00853***  
-0.00165 
-0.372***  
-0.0103 
0.384***  
-0.00171 
-9.236***  
-0.0138 
N 
N 
1,111,807 
0.825 

40% of the negative effect size for SPACs. 

4.1. RHDW fractional share trades as a proxy for app-based retail trades 

Overall,  the  estimates  from  Table  5  suggest  that  investors  who 
choose to execute fractional shares on the Robinhood and Drivewealth 
applications generally trade stocks that are both popular among retail 
traders in general but also have particular attributes. Specifically, their 
trading  selection  skews toward those stocks with higher  market capi-
talizations and recent trading volumes, as well as those that are newer, 
more  volatile  and  likely  to  be  a  meme  stock.  To  the  extent  RHDW 
fractional share trades represent the fractional component of a dollar- 
based  order  placed  at Robinhood  or  Drivewealth, they may  therefore 
reflect a proxy for a distinct form of order flow associated with such app- 
based retail platforms—a topic to which we turn in the next section. 

4. Do RHDW fractional share trades contain information? 

In this section, we explore the question of whether RHDW fractional 
share trades, despite their tiny size, nevertheless contain unique, value- 
relevant information. 

The findings in Table 5 are broadly consistent with the findings of Da 
et al. (2024) that fractional share trading affected both the extensive and 
intensive margin of retail trading. That is, fractional share trading fa-
cilitates access to more expensive stocks for capital constrained retail 
traders, and using dollar-based orders also facilitated purchasing more 
of any given stock.25 More generally, by facilitating dollar-based trading 
regardless of stock price, RHDW fractional share trades may provide a 
more  accurate proxy  for  retail  order  flow  originating  from  app-based 
retail platforms than the BJZZ metric, which represents the prevailing 
measure of retail order flow. 

There are several reasons why one might care about finding a proxy 
for  this  subset  of  retail  order  flow.  First,  using  data  from  Robintrack 
prior to its de-commissioning in August 2020, several studies find that 
Robinhood investors possess distinct characteristics and that Robinhood 

25 Da et al (2022) also make the important point that tiny trades when coor-
dinated could cause price pressure and facilitate trading frenzies. This suggests 
that the RHDW-FT metric may be particularly useful in investigations of retail 
trading frenzies such as occurred with GameStop in January 2021. For a dis-
cussion of the GameStop episode see “The rise and fall of the GameStop frenzy,” 
Wall Street Journal, Feb. 11,2021. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383612R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

trading is associated with future market conditions. For instance, Welch 
(2021)  finds  that  Robinhood  investors  aggressively  purchased  stocks 
during  the  initial  pandemic  downturn  and  after  the  ensuing  episodic 
market upswings, consistent with uninformed trading. Similarly, Barber 
et al. (2022a) find that, relative to other retail traders, Robinhood in-
vestors  engaged  in  more  attention-induced  trading  and  that  intense 
trading  by  Robinhood  investors  is  associated  with  negative  future 
returns. Eaton et al. (2022) likewise find that decreases in Robinhood 
investor  trading  due  to  platform  outages  are  associated  with  higher 
market  liquidity,  suggesting  that  Robinhood  investor  trading  harms 
liquidity.  While  these  studies  focused  on  Robinhood  investors,  it  is 
plausible that investors using other app-based trading platforms (e.g., 
those  powered  by  Drivewealth)  may  share  similar  characteristics  to 
Robinhood investors. 

Second,  from  an  empirical  perspective,  the  prevailing  measure  of 
retail  order  flow—the  BJZZ  metric—is  likely  to  capture  this  form  of 
uniformed  order  flow  with  considerable  noise.  For  instance,  because 
BJZZ  relies  on  sub-penny  price  improvement  for  identifying  retail 
trades, Barber et al. (2022b) find that BJZZ has high levels of Type II 
error, especially for retail trades in stocks with wider quoted spreads, 
which  may  be  especially  popular  with  app-based  traders  (e.g.,  meme 
stocks  and  newly  public  stocks).  Moreover,  to  the  extent  researchers 
seek to track retail trading among users of app-based platforms, the BJZZ 
metric is also likely to lead to high levels of Type I error for at least two 
reasons. First, BJZZ seeks to identify internalized retail trades, regard-
less  of  the  broker.  Consequently,  the  measure  captures  trades  from 
conventional retail brokers as well as newer app-based platforms. Sec-
ond,  as  noted  by  Shearer  (2022),  the  BJZZ  metric  also  captures 
non-retail, institutional trades executed through single dealer platforms 
(SDPs), which (like retail market makers) internalize trades for institu-
tional  clients  and  frequently  provide  sub-penny  price  improvement. 
Similar findings are reported by Battalio et al (2023) who use data on 
wholesaler institutional trades to show mistaken inclusions in the BJZZ 
metric. 

A cursory examination of trades in AAPL during the sample period 
underscores the possibility that a large share of trades classified as retail 
by BJZZ might reflect either the orders of wealthier retail traders using 
conventional brokers or institutional orders. During our sample period, 
there were approximately 22 million trades in AAPL executed on non- 
exchange  venues.  Of  these  trades,  the  BJZZ  algorithm  classified  12.3 
million  as  buy-initiated  retail  trades  and  9.7  million  as  sell-initiated 
retail  trades.  Among  the  12.3  million  trades  that  the  BJZZ  algorithm 
classified  as  buy-initiated  retail  trades,  over  1.5%  had  sale  condition 
flags that were consistent with institutional orders (most notably, flags 
indicating  a  trade  was  derivatively  priced  or  constituted  a  qualified 
contingent  trade).  More  importantly,  the  sizes  for  these  retail  trades 
were remarkably large. The median trade value for the retail buy trades 
was nearly $3,200, while 25% had a value in excess of $14,800. Over six 
thousand had values in excess of $1 million. Similar results appear for 
the  9.7  million  retail  sell  trades.  Given  Congressional  testimony  in 
February  2021  that  the  median  account  value  for  Robinhood’s  cus-
tomers  was  approximately  $240,  these  large  trade  values  underscore 
how the BJZZ metric is likely to capture a far broader swath of traders 
than simply app-based retail investors. 

This discussion helps explain the incomplete predictive power of the 
BJZZ metric in Table 5. Indeed, within the sample as a whole, a bivariate 
regression of the natural log of the number of RHDW fractional share 
trades in stock i observed on day t on the natural log of retail trades in 
stock i on day t using the BJZZ metric produces a coefficient of 0.77 and 

an  R-squared  of  only  0.64.26  Overall,  these  results  suggest  that  the 
RHDW  metric  should  provide  a  more  accurate  proxy  for  the  type  of 
dollar-based order flow characterizing app-based retail trading than the 
BJZZ metric. 

Before  proceeding,  however,  we  make  two  caveats  regarding  our 
analysis. The first is with respect to causation. The question we address 
is  whether  RHDW  fractional  share  trading  provides  information  with 
respect to future market conditions, regardless of why this might be the 
case.  As  such,  while  much  of  the  literature  on  retail  trading  seeks  to 
estimate the causal effect of retail trading on prices and liquidity, we 
expressly refrain from making any such claims here. For instance, we 
take no position on whether fractional share trading causes a stock to 
become  more  (or  less)  volatile  or  whether  traders  who  use  fractional 
share executions are simply drawn to stocks that are likely to become 
more (or less) volatile. 

The second caveat is with respect to an important limitation of the 
RHDW fractional share trade data for purposes of examining its infor-
mational content. Specifically, examination of the trade price relative to 
the TAQ NBBO at the time of a RHDW fractional share trade cautions 
against making inferences from the order imbalance between trades that 
the  TAQ NBBO  indicates might have originated  from marketable buy 
orders relative to marketable sell orders. For instance, in Table 6, we 
present  a  number of  trade  execution  statistics  for  our  sample  of  frac-
tional share trades, presented separately for Robinhood and Drivewealth 
by time of day. To ensure comparability between Robinhood and Driv-
ewealth  trades,  the  sample  period  is  restricted  to  November  1,  2021 
through  March  31,  2022  when  both  firms  were  reporting  fractional 
share trades to the tape. 

Turning first to Robinhood, across the roughly 51.5 million trades 
classified  as  Robinhood  fractional  share  executions  during  this  time 
period, approximately 20% occur within the first thirty minutes of the 
trading  day,  while  75%  occur  between  10:00  am  and  the  end  of  the 
regular trading session. However, the rates of buys, sells, and midpoint 
executions (based on the TAQ NBBO prevailing at the time of the trade) 
across these two time periods appear to be quite different. For instance, 
while 74% of trades occur at the midpoint between 10:00 am the close of 
the regular session, the figure is just 55% for trades between 9:30 am and 
10:00 am. Moreover, over 90% of trades occurring outside the regular 
trading session, when liquidity is scarce, are executed at the midpoint. 
Visual  examination  of  the  data  indicates  that  Robinhood’s  standard 
practice is to price fractional share executions at the midpoint and that 
the basis for these differentials is simply due to differences in the TAQ 
NBBO and the NBBO utilized by Robinhood for pricing. For example, 
examination of trades identified as “buy” or “sell” orders between 9:30 
am and 10:00 am are priced in decimals ending in either two decimals or 
a  half-penny,  consistent  with  midpoint  pricing.27  In  light  of  this  evi-
dence, we therefore assume Robinhood seeks to execute all trades at the 
midpoint  and  do  not  formally  assign  trade  direction  to  Robinhood 
trades. 

In contrast, assigning trade direction to Drivewealth fractional share 
trades using the TAQ NBBO does not suffer from these concerns, but it 
suggests  caution  for  other  reasons.  As  with  Robinhood,  Drivewealth 

26  These results are only modestly improved if we include stock fixed effects; 
doing so yields a regression coefficient of 0.57 and an R-squared of 78%. Nor do 
they improve if we focus on subsamples based on price, volume or market cap. 
For instance, sub-setting by the top 50% of stocks for any of these three metrics 
yields  R-squared  statistics  of  62%  to  66%.  Because  there  are  generally  fewer 
fractional trades for lower priced, lower volume, and lower market cap stocks, 
sub-setting on the lowest half of stocks by these metrics yields R-squared sta-
tistics of 59% (bottom half of stocks by price), 34% (bottom half of stocks by 
daily volume), and 49% (bottom half of stocks by daily market capitalization). 
27 Likewise, these “morning open”  trades are also frequently printed in clus-
ters  that  have  prices  reflecting  recent  but  stale  midpoint  prices,  which  may 
reflect challenges that Robinhood faces in processing the large volume of orders 
it receives prior to the market opening. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383613R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 6 
This table summarizes several trade execution measures for fractional share executions by Robinhood and Drivewealth in sample stocks between November 1, 2021 
through March 31, 2022. Trade direction was based on the trade’s price relative to the midpoint of the NBBO based on the NBBO published by the SIPs at the time of the 
trade using the participant timestamp for the trade. Trades were classified as Buy At NBO or Sell At NBB based on whether the price of the trade was equal to the NBO or 
NBB published by the SIPs at the time of the trade (also based on the participant timestamp for the trade.). Trades were excluded from the table if the NBBO was locked 
or crossed at the time of the trade.   

Robinhood Fractoinal Share Trades  

Fractional Share Trades 

Buy 

9:30 AM to 10:00 AM 
10:00 AM through Close of Regular Session 
Early Morning Session 
After Market Session 

10,384,602 
38,738,589 
772,855 
1,638,200 

18.78% 
13.64% 
2.04% 
3.22% 

Drivewealth Fractoinal Share Trades  

Fractional Share Trades 

Buy 

9:30 AM to 10:00 AM 
10:00 AM through Close of Regular Session 
Early Morning Session 
After Market Session 

13,140,556 
21,312,864 
74,751 
634 

63.59% 
63.39% 
48.08% 
17.19% 

Sell 

26.40% 
12.46% 
6.04% 
3.31% 

Sell 

35.32% 
35.82% 
25.14% 
81.86% 

Midpoint 

Buy At NBO 

Sell At NBB 

54.70% 
73.83% 
91.83% 
93.32% 

3.02% 
6.63% 
0.23% 
0.19% 

3.99% 
5.85% 
2.46% 
0.22%  

Midpoint 

Buy At NBO 

Sell At NBB 

1.07% 
0.75% 
2.37% 
0.63% 

39.26% 
46.63% 
26.46% 
11.51% 

19.75% 
27.10% 
13.89% 
19.72%  

executes a substantial portion of its fractional share trades (38%) during 
the first thirty minutes of the regular trading session, but in contrast to 
Robinhood,  it  prices  very  few  trades  at  the  NBBO  midpoint.  On  the 
contrary, most trades appear to be executed at precisely the NBBO with 
no price improvement. Between 9:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., nearly 60% of 
DW  fractional  share  trades  are  priced  in  this  fashion—a  number  that 
increases to over 73% between 10:00 am and the close of the regular 
session.  Yet,  while  assigning  trade  direction  for  Drivewealth  trades 
based on the TAQ NBBO appears to rest on a sounder footing, Table 6 
also indicates a clear bias in favor of buy orders.28 We are unaware of the 
precise  reason  for  this  bias,  but  it  is  consistent  with  the  “round  up” 
feature offered through Drivewealth.29  For instance, Cash-App utilizes 
Drivewealth to execute fractional share trades, and it also offers a Cash- 
App debit card that allows users to “round up” purchases to buy fractions 
of a share.30 (For example, after buying a coffee for $2.75, the Cash-App 
user might allocate $0.25 to a purchase of a pre-specified security.) To 
the extent a user elects to deploy this feature, the user would execute 
multiple sub-dollar buy transactions as they utilize the debit card, thus 
inflating  the  number  of  buy  transactions  relative  to  sell  transactions 
within  the  Drivewealth  trade  data.  Regardless  of  whether  this  is  the 
precise  reason  for  the  bias,  the  stark  disparity  between  buy  and  sell 
orders within the Drivewealth data suggests the need for caution. 

In light of these concerns, we do not assign trade direction to any 
RHDW  fractional  share  trades  and  focus  instead  on  their  overall  fre-
quency within the data. 

4.2. Estimation 

Our empirical tests examine whether RHDW fractional share trading 
is predictive of a stock’s future liquidity and volatility. In this regard, our 
framework is similar to the one adopted in Jones et al. (2022). Using the 
BJZZ  measure  of  retail  trading,  these  researchers  find  that  between 
January 2020 and March 2022, higher daily retail trading in a stock is 
associated with higher next-day effective spreads and volatility. These 
findings stand in contrast to prior research showing that retail trading 
enhances liquidity and lowers volatility (see, e.g., Barrot et al. (2016) 
and Foucault et al. (2011)). Jones et al. suggest the reason may stem 
from  the  evolution  of  retail  trading  following  the  emergence  of 
commission-free trading platforms, the rise of social media as informa-
the  entry  of 
tion  gathering  and  distribution  channels,  and 

28  This  is  true  for  all  periods  of  time  other  than  the  0.002%  of  trades  that 
occurred after the regular trading session.  
29  https://www.drivewealth.com/solutions/round-up/  
30  https://cash.app/help/us/en-us/10131-cash-card-round-ups 

“Robinhood-type”  investors.  Yet  this  interpretation  of  their  results  is 
complicated by virtue of the limitations of the BJZZ metric discussed 
previously. 

If  the  association  between  retail  trading  and  future  liquidity  and 
volatility is driven by “Robinhood-type” investors, we hypothesize that 
this  association  should  be  stronger  when  we  estimate  the  association 
using RHDW fractional share data relative to when it is estimated using 
the BJZZ metric. The intuition driving this hypothesis is that a RHDW 
fractional share trade likely reflects the fractional component of a dollar- 
based order placed at Robinhood or Drivewealth. Using the same sample 
of stock-days described in Section 3, we test this hypothesis by means of 
a  series  of  “horserace”  regressions  based  on  the  following  baseline 
regression specification: 

Yi,t = α0 + β1BJZZi,t(cid:0) 1 + β2Fractionali,t(cid:0) 1 + β′Xi,t(cid:0) 1 + δi + γt + εi,t

(2) 

The  outcome  of  interest,  Yi,t,  represents  one  of  three  different 
liquidity and volatility measures for stock i on day t. For liquidity, we use 
the Simple Averaged Percentage Effective Spread provided in the WRDS 
Intraday Indicators.31 For volatility, we examine two measures. The first 
volatility measure is a stock’s trade-based intraday volatility which is 
also  provided  in  the  WRDS  Intraday  Indicators.32  The  second  is  the 
weighted-average implied volatility across all call options on stock i on 
day  t  based  on  the  historical  option  pricing  data  provided  in  Option-
Metrics.33 The covariates of interest are BJZZi,t(cid:0) 1, which represents the 
natural log of the total number of retail trades in stock i on day t-1 based 
on the BJZZ metric, and Fractionali,t(cid:0) 1, which represents the natural log 
of one plus the total number of RHDW fractional share trades on the 
same stock-day. Following Jones et al. (2022), the regression also in-
cludes (for each stock i on day t-1) a vector of control variables, X, that 
the  prior  literature  suggests  can  affect  liquidity  and  volatility.  These 
include three measures of prior stock returns (prior day returns, prior 
week returns, and prior month returns), the prior month’s return vola-
tility, as well as the natural log of the following measures: the dollar 
volume  of  trades,  the  total  number  of  trades,  market  capitalization, 
turnover (measured as the previous month’s trading volume scaled by 

∑
n
k=1

2Dk(Pk(cid:0) Mk)
Mk 

31  This  measure  is  calculated  using  the  daily  TAQ  data  across  all  trades  for 
each stock i on day t as:  1
where N is the number of observed 
N*
trades, Dk  is 1 if the trade is signed as a buy order and -1 if signed as a sell order 
based  on  Lee  and  Ready  (1991),  Pk  is  the  trade  price,  and  Mk  is  the  NBBO 
midpoint at the time of the trade.  
32  This  measure  is  calculated  using  the  daily  TAQ  trade  data  as  the  return 
volatility across all observed trades for stock i on day t.  
33  The  weighted  average  was  calculated  using  the  daily  trading  volume  for 
each option contract on stock i on day t. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383614R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 7 
This table reports horserace regressions comparing the extent to which the liquidity and volatility for stock i on day t+1 can be predicted from (a) the total number of 
retail trades in stock i on day t estimated using the BJZZ metric, and (b) the total number of RHDW fractional share trades in stock i on day t. In Panel A, the outcome 
variable is the natural log of average percent effective spread for stock i on day t+1. In Panel B, the outcome variable is the natural log of the intraday volatility of trades 
for stock i on day t+1. In Panel C, the outcome variable is the natural log of the implied volatility for call options on stock i on day t+1. The sample period is March 1, 
2021 through March 31, 2022. The variables of interest are: BJZZ, which is the natural log of the total number of retail trades for stock i on day t estimated using the 
BJZZ metric; Fractional, which is the natural log of one plus the total number of RHDW fractional trades for stock i on day t; and the interaction of these variables with 
Top 100, an indicator for whether stock i ranks as among the 100 stocks with the most RHDW fractional share trades between March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2022. All 
regressions include day and stock fixed effects as well as the following time varying controls measured at day t-1: Volume (the natural log of the dollar volume of 
trades), Trades (the natural log of the total number of trades), Prior Day Return (previous day’s return), Prior Week Return (previous week’s return), Prior Month 
Return (previous month’s return), Mktcap (the natural log of the stock’s aggregate equity value), Turnover (the natural log of the previous month’s trading volume 
scaled by its outstanding shares), Prior Month Volatility (the previous month’s daily return volatility), and BTM (the matural log of the book-to-market ratio). We 
additionally include the lagged dependent variable in all regressions. The standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at day and stock level.  

Panel A: Effective Spreads      

BJZZ 

Fractional  

BJZZ X Top100    

Fractional X Top100    

Volume 

Trades 

Prior Day Return 

Prior Week Return 

Prior Month Return 

Mktcap 

Turnover 

Prior Month Volatility 

BTM 

Lagged DV 

Constant 

Observations 
R-squared 

Panel B: Intraday Volatility      

BJZZ 

Fractional  

BJZZ X Top100    

Fractional X Top100    

Volume 

Trades 

Prior Day Return 

Prior Week Return 

Prior Month Return 

Mktcap 

Turnover 

Prior Month Volatility 

BTM 

(1) 

-0.000547  
(0.00151)  

-0.0321*** 
(0.00299) 
0.0109** 
(0.00480) 
0.168*** 
(0.0174) 
0.0161*** 
(0.00503) 
-0.0574*** 
(0.00861) 
-0.0935*** 
(0.00926) 
-0.0679*** 
(0.00201) 
0.535*** 
(0.0349) 
-0.0341*** 
(0.00836) 
0.558*** 
(0.00628) 
-1.033*** 
(0.129) 
979,532 
0.951 

(1) 

0.00672*  
(0.00354)  

-0.0692*** 
(0.00783) 
0.0361*** 
(0.0130) 
0.305*** 
(0.0423) 
0.0514*** 
(0.0124) 
-0.121*** 
(0.0209) 
-0.210*** 
(0.0228) 
-0.170*** 
(0.00483) 
1.258*** 
(0.0875) 
-0.0989*** 
(0.0211) 

(2) 

0.00780*** 
(0.000911) 

-0.0304*** 
(0.00297) 
0.00398 
(0.00498) 
0.170*** 
(0.0173) 
0.0153*** 
(0.00500) 
-0.0571*** 
(0.00857) 
-0.0955*** 
(0.00931) 
-0.0691*** 
(0.00202) 
0.515*** 
(0.0339) 
-0.0334*** 
(0.00838) 
0.558*** 
(0.00630) 
-0.987*** 
(0.130) 
979,532 
0.951 

(2) 

0.0146*** 
(0.00239) 

-0.0643*** 
(0.00785) 
0.0276** 
(0.0138) 
0.310*** 
(0.0423) 
0.0501*** 
(0.0123) 
-0.121*** 
(0.0208) 
-0.214*** 
(0.0229) 
-0.172*** 
(0.00481) 
1.235*** 
(0.0864) 
-0.0976*** 
(0.0211) 

(3) 

-0.00254* 
(0.00151) 
0.00804*** 
(0.000913) 

-0.0297*** 
(0.00306) 
0.00531 
(0.00497) 
0.171*** 
(0.0173) 
0.0153*** 
(0.00501) 
-0.0572*** 
(0.00857) 
-0.0958*** 
(0.00930) 
-0.0690*** 
(0.00201) 
0.518*** 
(0.0342) 
-0.0333*** 
(0.00838) 
0.558*** 
(0.00628) 
-0.985*** 
(0.130) 
979,532 
0.951 

(3) 

0.00340 
(0.00350) 
0.0143*** 
(0.00237) 

-0.0652*** 
(0.00806) 
0.0258* 
(0.0136) 
0.310*** 
(0.0423) 
0.0500*** 
(0.0123) 
-0.121*** 
(0.0208) 
-0.214*** 
(0.0229) 
-0.172*** 
(0.00481) 
1.231*** 
(0.0864) 
-0.0976*** 
(0.0211) 

(4) 

-0.00264*  
(0.00151) 
0.00766***   
(0.000903) 
-0.0414***     
(0.0137) 
0.0771***     
(0.0145) 
-0.0297***  
(0.00307) 
0.00506  
(0.00500) 
0.172***  
(0.0173) 
0.0154***  
(0.00498) 
-0.0571***  
(0.00856) 
-0.0967***  
(0.00931) 
-0.0692***  
(0.00201) 
0.517***  
(0.0340) 
-0.0337***  
(0.00840) 
0.557***  
(0.00629) 
-0.979***  
(0.130) 
979,532 
0.951 

(4) 

0.00332  
(0.00350) 
0.0128***   
(0.00232) 
-0.193***     
(0.0421) 
0.330***     
(0.0487) 
-0.0653***  
(0.00810) 
0.0246*  
(0.0137) 
0.317***  
(0.0421) 
0.0507***  
(0.0122) 
-0.121***  
(0.0208) 
-0.217***  
(0.0230) 
-0.173***  
(0.00482) 
1.227***  
(0.0857) 
-0.0991***  
(0.0213) 

(continued on next page) 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383615R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 7 (continued ) 

Lagged DV 

Constant 

Observations 
R-squared 

Panel C: Implied Volatility      

BJZZ 

Fractional  

BJZZ X Top100    

Fractional X Top100    

Volume 

Trades 

Prior Day Return 

Prior Week Return 

Prior Month Return 

Mktcap 

Turnover 

Prior Month Volatility 

BTM 

Lagged DV 

Constant 

Observations 
R-squared 

*** p<0.01. 
** p<0.05. 
* p<0.1. 

0.470*** 
(0.00707) 
-3.681*** 
(0.310) 
979,043 
0.934 

(1) 

0.0195***  
(0.00157)  

-0.0377*** 
(0.00399) 
0.0516*** 
(0.00511) 
0.0325** 
(0.0129) 
-0.0201*** 
(0.00424) 
-0.0125* 
(0.00648) 
0.00206 
(0.00914) 
0.0154*** 
(0.00251) 
0.408*** 
(0.0341) 
0.0128 
(0.00834) 
0.459*** 
(0.0132) 
-0.129 
(0.120) 
633,613 
0.883 

0.469*** 
(0.00718) 
-3.601*** 
(0.311) 
979,043 
0.934 

(2) 

0.00433*** 
(0.000891) 

-0.0325*** 
(0.00399) 
0.0606*** 
(0.00557) 
0.0324** 
(0.0131) 
-0.0204*** 
(0.00425) 
-0.0129** 
(0.00647) 
-0.00133 
(0.00921) 
0.0159*** 
(0.00247) 
0.429*** 
(0.0353) 
0.0134 
(0.00838) 
0.461*** 
(0.0132) 
-0.119 
(0.121) 
633,613 
0.883 

0.469*** 
(0.00713) 
-3.603*** 
(0.311) 
979,043 
0.934 

(3) 

0.0187*** 
(0.00155) 
0.00218** 
(0.000869) 

-0.0371*** 
(0.00408) 
0.0501*** 
(0.00536) 
0.0333** 
(0.0129) 
-0.0203*** 
(0.00423) 
-0.0125* 
(0.00648) 
0.00157 
(0.00917) 
0.0150*** 
(0.00248) 
0.403*** 
(0.0342) 
0.0130 
(0.00836) 
0.459*** 
(0.0132) 
-0.117 
(0.121) 
633,613 
0.883 

0.467***  
(0.00721) 
-3.583***  
(0.312) 
979,043 
0.934 

(4) 

0.0183***  
(0.00155) 
0.00177**   
(0.000866) 
0.00730     
(0.00822) 
0.0319***     
(0.00841) 
-0.0368***  
(0.00411) 
0.0489***  
(0.00543) 
0.0334***  
(0.0128) 
-0.0206***  
(0.00420) 
-0.0128**  
(0.00644) 
0.000215  
(0.00921) 
0.0148***  
(0.00249) 
0.400***  
(0.0339) 
0.0124  
(0.00839) 
0.458***  
(0.0132) 
-0.100  
(0.121) 
633,613 
0.883  

outstanding shares), and the book-to-market ratio. All regressions are 
run  with  stock  (δi)  and  time  (γt)  fixed  effects,  and  we  additionally 
include the lagged dependent variable in all regressions to control for 
time  series  persistence  in  our  outcome  measure.  Standard  errors  are 
double-clustered by date and stock. 

As described in Section 3, our primary sample consists of all stock- 
days  from  March  1,  2021  through  March  31,  2022.  For  all  three 
outcome measures, our sample represents the universe of common eq-
uity issued by U.S. issuers within the CRSP data to the extent matches 
can  be  found  in  COMPUSTAT  and,  for  models  of  implied  volatility, 
OptionMetrics.  Yet  Section  3  also  highlighted  that  RHDW  fractional 
share trades are highly concentrated in select stocks, with nearly 60% of 
all RHDW fractional share trades occurring in just 100 stocks. To the 
extent RHDW fractional share trading is predictive of future liquidity 
and  volatility,  the  effect  should  be  especially  pronounced  among  the 
subset of stocks with high levels of fractional share trading. We therefore 
supplement our analysis by estimating the following, modified version 
of Eq. (2) to examine this possibility: 

Yi,t = α0 + β1BJZZi,t(cid:0) 1 + β2Fractionali,t(cid:0) 1 + β3Top100i,t(cid:0) 1* BJZZi,t(cid:0) 1
+ β4Top100i,t(cid:0) 1* Fractionali,t(cid:0) 1 + β′Xi,t(cid:0) 1 + δi + γt + εi,t

(3) 

Top100i,t(cid:0) 1  represents an indicator for whether stock i ranks among 
the top 100 stocks in terms of total RHDW fractional share trades be-
tween March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2022. By interacting this term with 
BJZZi,t(cid:0) 1 and Fractionali,t(cid:0) 1, the coefficients β3 and β4 estimate the degree 

to which the association between these two measures differs for stocks 
with especially high levels of fractional share trading. 

Regression  results  are  presented  in  Table  7,  with  each  panel  pre-
senting the results for each of three outcome measures For each panel, 
we first estimate Eq. (2) separately for BJZZi,t(cid:0) 1 and Fractionali,t(cid:0) 1 before 
including them together in the model. For instance, column (1) of Panel 
A estimates the association between effective spreads and daily retail 
trading volume (proxied by BJZZ) without including Fractionali,t(cid:0) 1  as a 
covariate, while column (2) does the opposite. In contrast with Jones 
et al., the coefficient for Fractional is negative in column (1), suggesting 
next-day effective spreads are decreasing in today’s daily retail trading, 
but the result is not statistically significant during our sample period. In 
contrast, the positive coefficient for Fractional in column (2) of Panel A is 
over fourteen times as large in magnitude and has a t-ratio of roughly 
8.5. The magnitude of the coefficient for Fractional increases modestly in 
column  (3)  when  we  include  both  measures  as  covariates,  while  the 
negative coefficient for BJZZ increases sizably in magnitude and has t- 
ratio of -1.68. As these covariates and all outcome measures are in logs, 
the  regression  estimates  indicate  that  a  10%  increase  in  RHDW  frac-
tional share trades is associated  with an 8 basis point increase in the 
following day’s Averaged Percentage Effective Spread. Note, however, 
that  to  the  extent  there  is  variation  in  daily  RHDW  fractional  share 
trades,  it  is  quite  often  far  in  excess  of  a  10%  change.  For  instance, 
within  the  sample,  the  average  daily  change  in  the  total  number  of 
RHDW fractional share trades has a mean of 114% and a median of 43%. 
Over one-quarter of daily changes are in excess of 80%. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383616R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Column (4) of Panel A presents the modified model with interaction 
effects. The coefficient for Fractional is just slightly less than the esti-
mates in columns (2) and (3), but the interaction of Top100 and Frac-
tional yields a coefficient estimate of 0.0771, which is roughly 10 times 
as large as the estimate for Fractional alone. In contrast, the interaction 
of  Top100  and  BJZZ  is  -0.0414  with  a  t-ratio  of  3.03  in  magnitude. 
Overall,  for  stocks  with  large  levels  of  fractional  share  trading,  these 
estimates  suggest  that,  as  in  Barrot  et  al.  (2016)  and  Foucault  et  al. 
(2011), conventional retail trades proxied by BJZZ are associated with 
higher future liquidity, while “Robinhood-type”  trades (as proxied by 
RHDW fractional share trades) are predictive of lower future liquidity. 
In Panel B and Panel C, we conduct the same analysis for predictors 
of  intraday  trade  volatility.  In  contrast  to  our  estimates  for  effective 
spreads, the coefficient estimate of 0.00672 for BJZZ in column (1) of 
Panel  B  is  now  both  positive  and  sufficiently  precise  to  distinguish it 
from zero. As with effective spreads, however, the elasticity of 0.0146 
for Fractional in column (2) of Panel B is over twice as large and more 
precisely  estimated.  Additionally,  while  the  coefficient  estimate  for 
Fractional remains largely the same in column (3), the estimate for BJZZ 
in column (3) declines by more than 50% and is no longer distinguish-
able from zero. In column (4) of Panel B, the interaction effects are again 
especially noteworthy. While the main effects for BJZZ and Fractional 
remain similar to the estimates in column (3), the interaction term of 
Top100 with Fractional yields a tightly estimated elasticity of 0.33 while 
its interaction with BJZZ yields a similarly precise estimate of -0.193. 

Columns (1) through (4) of Panel C provide the same set of estimates 
for implied volatility. Here, the results continue to indicate that the level 
of  daily  RHDW  fractional  share  trading  is  predictive  of  the  following 
day’s  volatility.  However,  coefficient  estimates  indicate  that  the  esti-
mated elasticity for BJZZ is slightly larger than that for Fractional across 
columns  (1)  through  (3)  of  Panel  C.  Nevertheless,  as  with  effective 
spreads and intraday volatility, the interaction effects in column (4) of 
Panel  C  continue  to  reveal  the  especially  strong  association  between 
RHDW  fractional  share  trades  and  volatility  among  stocks  with  high 
levels of fractional share trading. In particular, the interaction of Top100 
and Fractional yields an estimated elasticity of 0.0319 with a t-ratio of 
3.79, whereas its interaction with BJZZ yields an estimate of 0.0073 with 
a t-ratio of just 0.89. 

Finally, in unreported results, we also find that the results in Table 7 
persist across a range of alternative specifications. For instance, both the 
coefficient estimates and standard errors for Fractional, Fractional X Top 
100, and BJZZ X Top 100 in column 4 of Panel A and and Panel B remain 
largely the same if Eq. (3) is modified to predict effective spreads and 
volatility two and even three days in the future (i.e., by changing the lag 
in  Eq.  (3)  to  t-2  or  t-3  for  all  covariates).  Likewise,  making  the  same 
modifications to the specification used for predicting implied volatility 
in  column  4  of  Panel  C  leaves  the  coefficient  estimates  and  standard 
errors largely unchanged for Fractional X Top 100, and BJZZ X Top 100, 
though the coefficient estimates for Fractional (while positive) becomes 
statistically  insignificant  for  predicting  implied  volatility  beyond  one 
day. Additionally, as Table 3 reveals, many of the most popular RHDW 
stocks are those with high stock prices, high levels of liquidity, and high 
market  capitalizations,  and  we  find  that  the  results  in  Table  7  with 
respect  to  RHDW-FT  and  BJZZ  are  each  enhanced  with  respect  to 
magnitude and precision when we focus on sample stocks that are in the 

Fig. 6. Weekly Robinhood Fractional Share Trades in Clorox. 
This figure illustrates the Robinhood fractional share trades in Clorox (CLX) as 
reported to the FINRA OTC Transparency Data (blue bars) and as estimated by 
the fractional share classification algorithm (red dots). 

top 50% of stock price, trading volume, or market capitalization.34 

5. Some not so tiny problems with existing data on fractional 
share trades 

As  the  foregoing  sections  show,  trading  data  for  RHDW  fractional 
share trades provides information on a distinct form of retail order flow 
that is relevant for predicting liquidity and volatility, but it also suffers 
from a number of limitations. As noted in Section 2, perhaps the largest 
limitation is that it reflects only a portion of fractional share trades that 
occur in the market, given that retail fractional share trades executed by 
Apex are not presently observable in the consolidated tape or in the OTC 
Transparency data. Additionally, Table 1 indicates that, among brokers 
that  report  fractional  share  trades  to  the  tape,  Robinhood  and  Driv-
ewealth were by far the most active during our sample period; however, 
Fig.  1  underscores  that  other  brokerage  firms  are  quickly  gaining 
ground. Equally important, Robinhood or Drivewealth could alter their 
trade execution practices such that the classification rules used in this 
study no longer track their fractional share trades. 

The  existing  reporting  regime  also  raises  a  more  general  question 
about the accuracy of stock trading volume data for all U.S. equity se-
curities due to the “rounding up” rule, as highlighted in Bartlett et al. 
(2022) using trades in BRK.A. In addition to potentially misleading in-
vestors, inflated trading volume can directly affect firms and investors 
due  to  the  importance  of  trade  volume  data  across  a  number  of  U.S. 
securities regulations. For instance, rules relating to the quantity of stock 
that may  be repurchased by  a  company or  sold  by corporate insiders 
both hinge on the reported trading volume in a firm’s securities, as does 

34  In unreported regressions, we obtain very similar results as in Table 7 when 
we  restrict  the  sample  to  stocks  having  a  mean  daily  VWAP  of  no  less  than 
$100. The primary difference is that the coefficient estimates for Fractional in 
columns 3 and 4 of Panel C are no longer distinguishable from zero, although 
they remain positive. Importantly, coefficient estimates for all interactions in 
Table 7 retain approximately the same magnitudes and statistical significance 
as in Table 7. These results suggest that the results in Table 7 are not biased by 
the possibility that fractional share executions of lower priced stocks may lead 
to  more  riskless-principal  transactions  for  these  stocks  (and  thus  causing  our 
classifier to undercount the number of fractional share trades for lower priced 
stocks). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383617R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 7. Percent of Robinhood Fractional Trades Captured by OTC Transparency Data. Panel A presents a histogram showing for each sample stock the per-
centage of weeks with over 200 estimated RH fractional share trades that are documented in the weekly OTC Transparency data. Panel B presents a histogram 
showing for each sample stock the percent of Robinhood trades disclosed in the OTC Transparency data during the sample period relative to the total number of 
Robinhood fractional shares trades for the stock for weeks where our classifer finds at least 200 RH fractional share trades. Sample period reflects weeks commencing 
Monday, March 1, 2021 through the week of Monday, March 28, 2022. 

the ability of a firm to qualify as a foreign private issuer.35  Reported 
trading  volume  is  also  among  the  “Cammer  factors”  that  determine 
whether investors can bring a class action securities fraud lawsuit under 
Rule 10b-5.36 In this section, we explore both of these deficiencies of the 
current trade reporting regime for fractional share trades. 

5.1. Can the OTC transparency data provide a substitute source of data 
on fractional share trades? 

In Section 2, we evaluated our classification rules for RHDW frac-
tional share trades by comparing our estimated weekly tallies of such 
trades with those disclosed by Robinhood and Drivewealth in the OTC 
Transparency data. In this regard, one might view these latter data as a 
possible source of obtaining weekly, aggregate data for fractional share 
trades executed by those retail brokers that report fractional share trades 
to a FINRA trade reporting facility. However, as discussed in Section 2, 
FINRA’s disclosure of weekly trades by brokerage firm is subject to a “de 
minimis”  trading  threshold: Weekly trades will not be attributed to a 
specific FINRA member and will instead be aggregated and reported as 
completed by “De Minimis Firms” if either (a) the trades were executed 
by a FINRA member who executed fewer than 200 transactions per day 
for the reporting week, or (b) the trades were completed by a FINRA 
member who executed on average fewer than 200 transactions per day 
in the particular security during the week. For a 5-day trading week, this 
requirement  effectively  means  a  broker  must  execute  1,000  or  more 
fractional  share  trades  in  a  security  for  its  weekly  trades  to  appear 
individually in the OTC Transparency data. 

We examine the extent to which this de minimis rule excludes frac-
tional share trades from a broker’s OTC Transparency data. In partic-
ular, for each stock in our sample, we compare our weekly estimate for 
fractional  share  trades  in  Robinhood  with  the  weekly  disclosures  for 

Robinhood that appear in the OTC Transparency data between March 1, 
2021 and  March 31, 2022. As an example, we present the results for 
fractional share trades in The Clorox Company (CLX) during our sample 
period. In Fig. 6, we plot the weekly estimate of fractional share trades in 
CLX executed at Robinhood using our classification criteria (red dots) 
against the weekly trades in CLX disclosed for Robinhood in the OTC 
Transparency  data  (blue  bars).  Of  the  57  weeks  that  comprised  our 
sample period, the OTC Transparency data for Robinhood is missing for 
33 of these weeks. Moreover, as shown in the figure, the reason for these 
missing  weeks  was  the  fact  that  the  total  number  of  fractional  share 
trades executed by Robinhood during these weeks was just slightly less 
than 1000 trades per week. With regard to the total number of trades, 
the  OTC  Transparency  data  reported  a  total  of  32,091  whereas  our 
classifier estimates there were 63,837. In other words, the OTC Trans-
parency data captured 42% of the weeks where our classifier indicated 
that  there  were  RH  fractional  share  trades  and  50%  of  the  total  esti-
mated RH fractional share trades. 

We conduct a similar exercise for all stocks in our sample to evaluate 
the comprehensiveness of the OTC Transparency data with respect to 
both  the  total  weeks  observed  and  total  fractional  share  trades  for  a 
stock. Specifically, for each sample stock we calculate the ratio of (a) the 
total number of weeks (based on the OTC reporting week) where the 
OTC Transparency data discloses Robinhood as having executed trades 
in the stock to (b) the number of these weeks where our classifier detects 
at least 200 RH fractional share trades in the security.37  Likewise, for 
each of these weeks where our classifier detects at least 200 RH frac-
tional share trades in the security, we additionally calculate the ratio of 
(a) the total number of trades disclosed in the OTC Transparency data for 
Robinhood  during  our  sample  period  to  (b)  the  total  number  of  RH 
fractional share trades estimated for the stock based on our classifier. 
Importantly, for purposes of both calculations we include in the OTC 

35  See, e.g., 17 CFR § 230.144 (providing safe harbor for certain control person 
resale  transactions  so  long  as  all  trades  within  the  past  three  months  do  not 
exceed the average weekly reported volume of trading for the issuer); 17 CFR §
240.12h-6  (allowing  a  foreign  private  issuer  to  terminate  its  Exchange  Act 
registration if the U.S. average daily trading volume of the subject class of se-
curities has been no greater than 5 percent of the average daily trading volume 
of that class of securities on a worldwide basis for a recent 12-month period).  
36  https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2012/08/23/do-courts-count-cammer-fa 
ctors/ 

37  We  impose  a  minimum  of  200  fractional  share  trades  to  account  for  the 
possibility that our Robinhood classifier incorrectly classifies a trade as an RH 
fractional share trade. For instance, after applying the RH classifier to trades in 
sample  stocks  during  January  2021  (one  month  prior  to  when  Robinhood 
commenced disclosing fractional share trades), the mean number of estimated 
RH  fractional  share  trades  for  sample  stock-days  is  21.  Assuming  a  5-day 
trading week, this estimate indicates that for an average stock our RH classi-
fier might overstate RH fractional share trades by approximately 100 trades per 
week. We require at least 200 estimated trades to err on the side of caution. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103836180%20%40%60%80%Percent of Distribution0.2.4.6.81Percent of Weeks with >200 RH Fractional ShareTrades Observed in OTC Data0%20%40%60%80%Percent of Distribution0.2.4.6.81Percent ofTrades Reported in FINRA Relative to Estimated RH Fractional ShareTradesR.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 8 
This table shows estimates of the total dollar value of inflated trading volume between March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2022 for sample stocks due to RHDW fractional 
share trades and the rounding-up rule. Listed are the top twenty stocks within the sample by dollar value of inflated volume. The 10% Scenario assumes that the dollar 
value of each fractional share trade is equal to the lesser of $240 and 10% of the reported trade price. The 90% Scenario assumes that the dollar value of each fractional 
share trade is equal to the lesser of $240 and 90% of the reported trade price.  

Symbol 

Company 

Average Closing 
Price 

Reported Dollar 
Volume ($billions) 

Dollar Inflation (10% 
Scenario) ($ billions) 

Dollar Inflation (90% 
Scenario). ($ billions) 

Percent Inflation 
(10% Scenario) 

Percent Inflation 
(90% Scenario) 

BRK.A 

AMZN 
TSLA 
GOOG. 
L 
GOOG 
NFLX 
NVDA 
MSFT 
AAPL 
FB 
GME 
COIN 
CMG 

DIS 
MRNA 
MELI 
AMC 

BKNG 
PYPL 
COST 

BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY 
INC DEL 
AMAZON COM INC 
TESLA INC 
ALPHABET INC 

ALPHABET INC 
NETFLIX INC 
NVIDIA CORP 
MICROSOFT CORP 
APPLE INC 
META PLATFORMS INC 
GAMESTOP CORP NEW 
COINBASE GLOBAL INC 
CHIPOTLE MEXICAN 
GRILL INC 
DISNEY WALT CO 
MODERNA INC 
MERCADOLIBRE INC 
A M C ENTERTAINMENT 
HOLDINGS INC 
BOOKING HOLDINGS INC 
PAYPAL HOLDINGS INC 
COSTCO WHOLESALE 
CORP NEW 

$4,35,190.40 

$212 

$173.04 

$173.04 

81.64% 

81.64% 

$3,302.32 
$810.34 
$2,613.09 

$2,636.22 
$529.14 
$383.45 
$287.72 
$148.29 
$312.83 
$171.11 
$247.98 
$1,613.16 

$168.28 
$243.33 
$1,430.84 
$28.64 

$2,320.96 
$226.56 
$452.60 

$3,127 
$5,957 
$1,128 

$930 
$646 
$2,481 
$2,242 
$3,659 
$1,845 
$333 
$361 
$121 

$479 
$907 
$200 
$779 

$235 
$653 
$282 

Total: 

$26,577 

$16.68 
$10.31 
$5.00 

$1.95 
$0.90 
$0.90 
$0.89 
$0.87 
$0.73 
$0.65 
$0.51 
$0.42 

$0.33 
$0.33 
$0.30 
$0.28 

$0.24 
$0.24 
$0.23 

$215 

$16.68 
$8.27 
$5.00 

$1.95 
$0.54 
$0.34 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.19 
$0.08 
$0.12 
$0.40 

$0.04 
$0.09 
$0.27 
$0.03 

$0.24 
$0.03 
$0.13 

$208    

0.53% 
0.17% 
0.44% 

0.21% 
0.14% 
0.04% 
0.04% 
0.02% 
0.04% 
0.20% 
0.14% 
0.35% 

0.07% 
0.04% 
0.15% 
0.04% 

0.10% 
0.04% 
0.08% 

0.53% 
0.14% 
0.44% 

0.21% 
0.08% 
0.01% 
0.01% 
0.00% 
0.01% 
0.02% 
0.03% 
0.33% 

0.01% 
0.01% 
0.14% 
0.00% 

0.10% 
0.00% 
0.04%   

Fig. 8. Distribution of Percent Inflation – 10% Scenario vs. 90% Scenario. This figure presents the distributions of the natural log of the average daily percent 
inflation for sample stock-days due to the rounding-up rule. Estimates for the 10% Scenario are presented in red; estimates for the 90% Scenario are presented in blue. 

Transparency data all weekly disclosed trades for Robinhood regardless 
of the number of shares traded that week. Because some of these trades 
may reflect whole share trades, our calculation of fractional share trades 
disclosed in the OTC Transparency data are likely to be overstated. In all 
cases we focus on trades occurring from the week of Monday, March 1, 
2021 through the week of Monday, March 28, 2022. 

We present histograms for both measures in Fig. 7. Panel A provides 
the results for weeks observed. Across the 3897 stocks where our clas-
sifier finds at least one week with at least 200 RH fractional share trades, 
the  OTC  Transparency  data  does  not  provide  data  for  Robinhood’s 
fractional share trades for even a single week for 2485 (64%) of these 

stocks. For 90% of these 3897 stocks, the OTC Transparency data in-
cludes  data  for  less  than  half  of  these  weeks.  Moreover,  across  these 
3897 stocks, the OTC Transparency data provides full weekly coverage 
for just 162 (4%). Similar results appear in Panel B, which focuses on the 
percent  of  total  fractional  share  trades  captured  by  the  OTC  Trans-
parency data across stock-weeks where our classifier detects at least 200 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383619051015Percent of Distribution-20-15-10-5010% Scenario90% ScenarioR.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 9 
This table summarizes the frequency of stock-days based on their percent inflation and their stock price under the 10% Scenario and the 90% Scenario. Data are limited 
to stock-days where the percent inflation for either the 10% Scenario or the 90% Scenario is greater than 1%. Percent Inflation Range is the percent inflation for a stock- 
day based on either the 10% Scenario or the 90% Scenario. Each range includes stocks with inflation greater than the lower bound and less than or equal to the upper 
bound. Price Quintiles are defined as 1: closing price<=$6.73; 2:$6.730<closing price<=$13.57; 3: $13.57<closing price<=$29.75; 4:$29.75<closing price<=$68.52; 
5: closing price>$68.52. Columns (1) through (5) present frequencies for the 10% Scenario while Columns (6) through (10) present frequencies for the 90% Scenario. 
The number in parentheses represents the average daily number of trades for the stock-days assigned to the Inflation-Range X Price Quintile bin.   

(1) 
10% Scenario 

(2) 

Price Quintile 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(7) 

(6) 
90% Scenario  

Price Quintile 

(8) 

(9) 

(10)  

Percent Inflation Range 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1% - 5% 
5% - 10% 
10% - 15%  
15% - 20% 
20% - 25%  
25% - 30%  
30% 35%  
35% - 40%  
40% - 45%  
45% - 50%  
50% - 55%  
55% - 60%  
60% - 65%  
65% - 70%  
70% - 75%  
75% - 80%  
80% - 85%  
85% - 90%  
Total 

45 (235.76) 
2 (133.5) 

1 (6) 

48 

1109 (54.45) 
268 (47.75) 
159 (57.77) 
116 (21.39) 
85 (39.56) 
52 (16.58) 
60 (55.92) 
21 (202.52) 
79 (3.05) 
49 (49.53) 
5 (169.8) 
20 (4) 
16 (4.94) 
7 (340.86)  
3 (1140.33) 
1 (1359)  
4 (442.5)  
234 (40.46) 
2288 

958 (87.37) 
157 (24.83) 
60 (14.07) 
28 (9.5) 
17 (5.71) 
10 (10) 
6 (3.33) 
8 (5.13) 
6 (2.67) 
9 (7) 
3 (12.67) 
2 (4.5) 
2 (3) 

2 (8) 

16 (1.44) 
1284 

809 (190.4) 
157 (32.37) 
59 (15.37) 
51 (22.65) 
32 (20.84) 
18 (9.17) 
23 (9.83) 
14 (14.79) 
14 (7.14) 
9 (5.78) 
5 (7) 
4 (4.25) 
3 (5.33) 
5 (16.2) 
1 (17) 
3 (15.33) 
3 (19) 
20 (1.95) 
1230 

880 (2825.52) 
312 (169.84)  
116 (76.66)    
76 (18.87)    
63 (10.11)     
48 (12.04)     
39 (11.05)    
28 (10.54)     
44 (10.8)    
21 (9.05)     
30 (11.87)     
19 (9.58)     
22 (10.18)  
12 (10.08)    
9 (7.22)     
3 (7.67)     
2 (10)    
28 (2.57)      
1752 

1 (6) 

602 (43.49) 
338 (64.54) 

152 (10.6) 
34 (4.56) 

1 (25)   

222 (16.86) 
51 (6.53) 
2 (21) 
1 (12) 

3 (14.33) 

1 (12) 

1 (17) 

1 (10)  

633 (3650.12) 
254 (194.58) 
70 (110.39) 
28 (28.75) 
32 (10.84) 
24 (12.25) 
22 (10.77) 
16 (13.81) 
12 (13.58) 
7 (12.57) 
7 (7.86) 
3 (7) 
3 (6.33) 
6 (4.33) 
1 (5) 
1 (5) 

1 

941 

186 

282 

1119  

RH  fractional  share  trades  in  the  security.38  Among  the  1412  sample 
stocks  where  the  OTC  Transparency  data  discloses  at  least  one  week 
with Robinhood fractional share trades, the total number of trades re-
ported in the OTC Transparency data for each stock during the sample 
period is often far less than the total number of trades estimated using 
our RH classifier. Indeed, for just 334 stocks does this number represent 
at least 95% of the total RH fractional share trades estimated using the 
classifier. 

In summary, because of the de minimis rule, the OTC Transparency 
data can be used to infer fractional share trade volume for only those 
stocks with very high levels of fractional share trading. And as discussed, 
this conclusion applies only to brokers such as Robinhood who report 
fractional share trades to the tape. For brokers such as Apex that do not 
fill fractional share trades on a principal basis, the OTC Transparency 
data  lacks  any  information  at  all  concerning  the  incidence  of  their 
fractional share executions. 

5.2. How much is trading volume inflated by fractional share reporting 
protocols? 

As  noted  previously,  Bartlett  et  al.  (2022)  illustrate  how  the 
“rounding up” rule for fractional share trades has resulted in phantom 
trading volume for BRK.A that now represents roughly 90% or more of 
its daily trading volume. Yet, they also note that “given its unusually 
high stock price, BRK.A is in many ways simply an exaggerated example 
of  how  FINRA’s  rule  along  with  the  rise  in  fractional  share  trading 
creates phantom, non-existent trading volume across all stocks.” In this 
section we examine the extent to which all securities within our sample 
experienced  inflated  trading  volume  due  to  RHDW  fractional  share 
trades and the rounding-up rule. 

The extent to which the rounding-up rule results in inflated trading 

38  Where our RH classifier estimated fewer total trades than were disclosed in 
the OTC Transparency data, we set the percent reported to 1.0 to highlight the 
extent to which the OTC Transparency data appears to provide 100% coverage 
of Robinhood fractional share trades. 

volume  naturally  depends  on  the  actual  trade  value  of  each  RHDW 
fractional share trade that is rounded up to a whole share. Because we 
cannot  observe  trade  values,  we  estimate  a  range  of  inflation  by 
assuming that each fractional share trade’s true dollar value falls under 
one of two scenarios. Both scenarios rely on Congressional testimony in 
February  2021  that  the  median  account  value  for  Robinhood’s  cus-
tomers is approximately $240. Under the first scenario, we assume that 
the  dollar  value  of  each  RHDW  fractional  share  trade  is  equal  to  the 
lesser of $240 and 10% of the reported trade price. Under the second 
scenario, we assume that its value is equal to the lesser of $240 and 90% 
of the reported trade price. For example, a RHDW fractional share trade 
that  is  reported  as  a  whole  share  trade  worth  $100  would  have  an 
assumed dollar value of $10 under the “10% Scenario” and $90 under 
the “90% Scenario.” This trade would appear in the trade data as a whole 
share trade; therefore, based on the stock’s closing price, our two esti-
mates  of  “dollar  inflation”  for  this  trade  would  be  $90  and  $10, 
respectively.  Likewise,  our  estimates  of  “percent  inflation”  would  be 
90% (i.e., $90/$100) and 10% (i.e., $10/$100), respectively. 

Our sample of trades between March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2022 
consists of 13.19 billion trades, of which we classify nearly 195 million 
(1.48%)  as  fractional  share  trades  executed  by  Robinhood  or  Driv-
ewealth. Under the 10% Scenario, these fractional share trades would 
produce $225.3 billion of dollar inflation due to the rounding-up rule 
over the sample period. Under the 90% Scenario, this estimate would be 
$210.5 billion. The total reported trading volume for all trades in the 
sample is $99.5 trillion based on intra-day TAQ data; therefore, these 
estimates indicate that the total reported dollar volume of trades during 
our  sample  period  is  inflated  by  21  to  23  basis  points  due  to  the 
rounding-up rule and RHDW fractional share trades. 

These aggregate figures, however, mask considerable heterogeneity 
in inflation among stocks. In Table 8, we rank the top twenty stocks by 
both measures of dollar inflation. Consistent with Bartlett et al. (2022), 
the  rounding-up  rule  was  especially  consequential  for  BRK.A,  whose 
dollar volume of trading was inflated by a total of $173 billion under 
either inflation estimate during the sample period. By itself, this figure 
accounts for roughly 80% of the total dollar inflation estimate for the 
sample as a whole. Not surprisingly, the remaining twenty stocks were 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383620R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

also among the market’s most expensive stocks and accounted for esti-
mated  dollar  inflation  of  approximately  $42  billion  under  the  10% 
Scenario and $35 billion under the 90% Scenario. Combined with BRK. 
A, these amounts represented over 95% of the aggregate dollar inflation 
in the sample. 

Additionally,  Table  8  indicates  that  large  dollar  values  of  inflated 
trading volume are most likely to occur with higher-priced stocks, but it 
also  suggests  that  the  distortion  for  any  given  stock  will  also  be  a 
function of its overall liquidity. For example, the rounding-up rule ap-
pears  to  have  produced  billions  of  dollars  of  inflated  trading  volume 
during our sample period for Amazon, Tesla, and Alphabet, but these 
stocks are also among the most heavily traded securities such that their 
overall dollar volume of trades during the sample was inflated by less 
than  1%.  In  contrast,  trades  in  BRK.A  typically  averaged  just  a  few 
hundred per day prior to our sample period. As a result, when Robin-
hood commenced reporting fractional share trades to the tape—which 
during  our  sample  period  were  approximately  1,400  per  day—the 
rounding-up rule meant that roughly 81% of the dollar volume of trades 
for BRK.A was inflated each day due to RHDW fractional share trades. 
Within  our  sample,  we  observe  many  stocks  with  sparse  trading, 
raising  the  possibility  that  a  small  number  of  RHDW  fractional  share 
trades  on  any  given  day  might  distort  the  reported  daily  volume  for 
these  stocks,  even  if  the  aggregate  dollar  value  of  the  distortion  is 
modest.  In  Fig.  8,  we  present  histograms  for  the  natural  log  of  the 
average daily percent inflation across all stock-days in the sample using 
both the 10% Scenario and the 90% Scenario. The natural log of 1% is 
-4.6; therefore, Fig. 8 indicates that the rounding-up rule is unlikely to 
distort  the  trading  volume  for  the  vast  majority  of  stock-days.  None-
theless, the figure also reveals a nontrivial number of stock-days in the 
right tail of the two distributions, particularly in the distribution for the 
10% Scenario. 

In Table 9, we examine more closely the stock-days appearing in the 
tail of these distributions, excluding for this purpose BRK.A. For each 
stock-day having more than 1% inflation under either metric, we assign 
it to a five-percent inflation band, from the lowest band of 1% to 5% 
through the highest band of 85% to 90%. Percent inflation estimates for 
securities with low stock prices will be more sensitive to assumptions 
regarding the true value of the trade; therefore, we additionally classify 
a  stock-day  by  the  quintile  of  its  average  closing  price  (based  on  the 
average  closing  prices  across  all  stock-days  in  the  full  sample).  Each 
stock-day in the tail of the distributions for Fig. 8 is thus assigned to a 
Percent Inflation Range X Price Quintile bin. 

Columns (1) through (5) of Table 9 present the frequency of stock- 
days for each bin for the 10% Scenario. For each bin, we also present 
in parentheses the average number of all daily trades for the stock-days 
assigned to the bin. Focusing first on column (1), 45 stock-days assigned 
to  the  first  quintile  (stock  price<=$6.73)  had  a  percent  inflation  of 
between 1% and 5%, but only 3 stock-days in this quintile had percent 
inflation that was higher than 5%, and none had percent inflation that 
exceeded 20%. In contrast, column (2) reveals that 2,288 stock-days had 
a percent inflation that exceeded 1%, with 1,179 stock-days having a 
percent inflation of greater than 5%. Remarkably, even though stock- 
days  in  the  second  quintile  had  an  average  closing  price  that  ranged 
from  just  $6.73  to  $13.57,  nearly  300  of  these  stock-days  had  price 
inflation of more than 50% under the 10% Scenario, and 234 had price 
inflation of 85% to 90%—a rate of inflation that exceeded even that of 
BRK.A. 

As with BRK.A, this result stems from the very low level of trading for 
these  stock-days.  As  shown  in  column  (2),  the  234  stock-days  with 
percent inflation of greater than 85% had an average of just 40.46 trades 
for the day. Moreover, examination of the stock-days in column (2) re-
veals that many of the firms represented pre-acquisition SPACs that were 
structured to trade at roughly $10/share but also had very modest (and 
occasionally  zero)  trades  per  day  as  they  searched  for  an  acquisition 
target. As a result, a sudden increase in retail interest in one of these 
securities (perhaps due to speculation that the SPAC had found a merger 

partner) could result in sizeable distortions of the stock’s daily trading 
volume to the extent retail investors executed fractional shares trades 
using Robinhood or Drivewealth. While we cannot rule out the possi-
bility  that  some  of  these  RHDW  trades  are  false  positives  under  our 
classification rules, column (2) nevertheless highlights the potential for 
the rounding-up rule to create significant distortions in reported trading 
volumes for an illiquid security regardless of its stock price. 

Columns (3) and (4) summarize percent inflation rates for quintile 3 
stock-days  (closing  price  between  $13.57  and  $29.75)  and  quintile  4 
stock-days  (closing  price  between  $29.75  and  $68.52).  In  both cases, 
there are roughly 1,200 stock-days having percent inflation of more than 
1%, though the number of stock-days having extreme inflation is more 
modest than in column (2). As with column (2), however, the stock-days 
that do have percent inflation of more than 5% are associated with very 
few daily trades. 

In column (5), we present percent inflation for quintile 5 stock-days 
(closing  price  greater  than  $68.52).  As  exemplified  by  BRK.A,  more 
expensive  stocks  should  be  at  a  higher  risk  of  inflation  due  to  the 
rounding-up rule, and under the 10% Scenario, column (5) reveals that 
880  stock-days  had  percent  inflation  of  1%  to  5%  despite  having  an 
average of  roughly 2,800 trades per  day.  However, as  with the  other 
columns, more extreme rates of percent inflation are limited to stock- 
days having far fewer daily trades. 

Columns  (6)  through  (10)  present  percent  inflation  results  for  the 
90% Scenario. As expected, the overall level of inflation is less than in 
the 10% Scenario, though percent inflation in the range of 1% to 5% 
remains present across all price quintiles. More extreme rates of percent 
inflation are primarily confined to quintile 5 stock-days. As in the 10% 
Scenario,  these  extreme  rates  of  inflation  occur  on  stock-days  having 
very few daily trades, illustrating again the risk that the rounding-up 
rule  can  create  severe  distortions  in  reported  trading  volume  for 
illiquid securities. 

6. Conclusions 

Retail  trading  is  changing  and  fractional  shares  are  playing  a 
growing role in this evolution. No longer the “nuisance” of times past, 
fractional shares are part of a new way of trading in which customers 
specify orders in dollars not shares, fintech apps sweep up spare change 
to  invest  in  tiny  amounts,  and  high  share  prices  are  no  longer  an 
impediment to retail stock ownership. Despite the growing importance 
of fractional share trades, our paper makes clear the challenges in un-
derstanding this new development—fractional share trades are largely 
opaque,  with  disparate  reporting  rules,  exclusion  from  exchange 
trading, and “rounding-up”  and “de minimis”  rules all contributing to 
the difficulty in measuring or even observing these trades. 

This paper developed a methodology for identifying fractional share 
trades  in  the  consolidated  market  data  that  were  executed  between 
March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2022 by two of the largest providers of 
fractional  share  trading.  Our  approach  uses  a  latency-based  digital 
footprint  to  estimate  their  fractional  share  trades,  which  provides  a 
unique window into the trading of the largest fractional share broker- 
dealers  for  retail  investors.  Our  results  show  a  surprising  breadth  to 
fractional share trading: high-priced stocks, meme stocks, IPOs, SPACs, 
and popular retail stocks now exhibit considerable numbers of these tiny 
trades.  We  also  demonstrate,  however,  that  RHDW  fractional  share 
trading is not evenly distributed across stocks, with many smaller, non- 
retail stocks less likely to feature such trading. 

Nonetheless, we show that these tiny trades matter. Fractional share 
trades executed by Robinhood and Drivewealth are predictive of future 
liquidity  and  volatility,  suggesting  an  information  content  to  these 
trades notwithstanding their small size. Equally intriguing, our results 
show that the RHDW-FT metric better captures this market information 
than the BJZZ metric, heretofore the standard proxy for retail trading. 
While the precise reason why the RHDW-FT metric contains this infor-
mation is beyond the scope of this paper, the fact that it is consistent 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383621R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

with  the  findings  of  Eaton  et  al.  (2022)  that  Robinhood  trading  may 
harm liquidity suggests the possibility of a causal path, perhaps owing to 
app-based retail traders being influenced by social media based infor-
mation  cascades  (Hirshleifer  and  Teoh,  2003).  That  fractional  share 
trades appear to possess information only underscores the importance of 
investigating further the evolving world of retail trading. 

We  look  forward  to  examining  the  growth  and  dispersion  of  frac-
tional share trading in future research. But to do so there needs to be 
greater transparency  in  the data,  a better  understanding of  how frac-
tional shares fit into trading strategies, and hopefully major changes to 
incorporate  fractional  share  trades  into  the  current  national  market 
system of equity trading. Certainly, these tiny trades raise big issues for 
researchers and regulators alike. 

Data availability 

Tiny  Trades,  Big  Questions  data  set  (Reference  data)  (Mendeley 

Data). 

Appendix A 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Robert P. Bartlett: Writing –  review &  editing, Writing –  original 
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, 
Conceptualization. Justin McCrary: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
–  original  draft,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisition, 
Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Maureen O’Hara: Writing – review 
& editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization. 

Declaration of competing interest 

Disclosure Statement – Robert Bartlett 
I have nothing to disclose 
Disclosure Statement – Justin McCrary 
I have nothing to disclose 
Disclosure Statement – Maureen O’Hara 
I have nothing to disclose  

Classification Rules for Identifying Robinhood and Drivewealth Fractional Share Trades Between March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2022 
We develop our classification rules for identifying Robinhood and Drivewealth fractional share trades in three steps. First, we strategically place 
fractional share trades in select issuers using the Robinhood and Drivewealth trading platforms, and we examine the resulting trade reports in the TAQ 
data to identify traces of a unique “signature” for Robinhood and Drivewealth fractional share trades. Second, with evidence of these “signatures,” we 
then compare trading data for the period of time before Robinhood and Driveweath began reporting fractional share trades to the tape with trading 
data after such trading commenced to derive our exact classification rules. Finally, we use the OTC Transparency data to test the accuracy of each rule 
during our sample period.  

(1)  Identifying Traces of the Robinhood and Drivewealth Signatures 

We ground our classification rule in the simple observation that the trade reports for the fractional share trades of Robinhood and Driv-
ewealth that appear in the TAQ data should have a number of distinctive characteristics. For one, because these trades are effectively inter-
nalized trades, they should be reported to one of three FINRA trade reporting facilities (TRFs). For another, due to the “rounding-up” rule, these 
trades should be for a single share. Lastly, there are reasons to believe that these trades will be characterized by unique trade reporting la-
tencies, as we explain here. 

Trade reports for U.S. equity securities listed on a national stock exchange are required to be disseminated in real time to two securities 
information processors (SIPs) for public distribution. Additionally, since 2016 the trade reports redistributed by the SIPs (and recorded in the 
TAQ data) have included two timestamps: a participant timestamp (reflecting the time, generally in microseconds, that a trade or quote update 
occurred at the market center) and the “SIP” timestamp (reflecting the time, generally in microseconds, that a trade or quote was processed by 
the relevant SIP). 

These two timestamps provide a means to estimate the time it takes for a trade report to travel from the executing broker to either the SIP 
located within NYSE’s trading facility (for Tape A and Tape B securities) or the SIP located within Nasdaq’s facility (for Tape C securities). 
Moreover, as shown in Bartlett and McCrary (2019), the transmission latencies across trading venues reveal distinct venue-specific latencies on 
account of the different geographical locations of each venue and the relevant SIP. For instance, a trade report relating to an execution in a Tape 
A security in Nasdaq’s matching engine in Carteret, New Jersey will take longer to arrive at the NYSE’s SIP in Mahwah, New Jersey, than a trade 
report relating to an execution in a Tape A security on the NYSE. Thus, to the extent a broker algorithmically executes fractional share trades at 
the same datacenter, it should, in principle, be possible to observe the broker’s distinctive trade reporting latency. The large number of trades 
executed by Robinhood and Drivewealth should additionally increase the likelihood of identifying any such distinctive trade reporting latencies 
among all trades within the TAQ data. 

We began our search for evidence of distinct reporting latencies for Robinhood and Drivewealth by placing several trades for either $10.00 or 
$1.00 in a number of different securities using each firm’s trading platform.39 To facilitate locating each trade report in the TAQ data, most of 
our trades focused on purchasing fractional shares of BRK.A, which typically has fewer than 1,000 trades per day due to its unusually high stock 
price. However, we also placed fractional share trades in a variety of other stocks and ETFs (including AMZN, TSLA, and SIRI) to check for 
consistency in the two firm’s reporting latencies across different securities. 

In Table A1, we illustrate how five of these trades ultimately appeared in the TAQ data. The first two trades were placed with Robinhood and 
represented orders to buy $10 and $1 of BRK.A. As shown in columns (5) and (6), the trade confirmation for these orders indicated that they 
were filled at a per share price of $474,668.445 and $472,203.99, respectively. The trade confirmation also indicated that the first trade 
represented a fractional share purchase of 0.000021 of a share of BRK.A, while the second trade represented 0.000002 of BRK.A. Next, the TAQ 
trade file was examined to locate each trade based on its per share trade price and the minute at which it was filled according to our trading 
account history. As shown in columns (7) through (10), in each case a one share trade was located in the TAQ data that had the appropriate 

39  Drivewealth does not itself offer a brokerage platform to retail investors; instead, its brokerage platform is designed to provide securities trading functionality for 
other firms. We therefore use Cash App to execute trades through the Drivewealth platform. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383622R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

price and venue, and had no unexpected special trade conditions.40 Moreover, no other trades having these characteristics appears in the TAQ 
trade data during the minute of our trades. We therefore conclude that these two trades in TAQ reflect the buy orders we placed at Robinhood. 
Columns (12) and (13) reflect the participant timestamp and SIP timestamp for these trades, which allows us to calculate the latency for each 
trade in Column (14). As shown there, the trades appear to reveal traces of distinct reporting latencies. Specifically, each trade report took 
roughly 210-250 milliseconds to travel from the execution venue to the relevant SIP. 

Rows 3 and 4 provide similar examples for two trades placed with Cash App, which utilizes Drivewealth for executing trades. As shown in 
columns (3) and (4), each trade represented a buy order for $1.00 of each of NVR, Inc. and BRK.A. (NVR, Inc. is similar to BRK.A insofar that 
relatively few trades occur per day due to its roughly $4,000 stock price, facilitating our ability to locate the trades in the TAQ data). As with the 
first two trades, we locate these trades in the TAQ data after searching for single share, FINRA trades that were executed at the correct minute 
and price, and we confirm that no other trades having these characteristics appear during that minute. As shown in Column (14), each trade 
likewise appears to have a distinctive reporting latency of roughly 25 milliseconds. 

Using 2016 trading data, Bartlett and McCrary (2019) report that over 80% of FINRA-reported trades have a reporting latency of less than 20 
milliseconds. Thus, the unusually large reporting latencies for these four trades provides an additional reason to believe that the fractional share 
trades executed by Robinhood and Drivewealth should be distinguishable from other trades on the basis of their reporting latencies. Moreover, 
as shown in column (11), examination of the trade reports for our sample of trades also revealed that Robinhood and Drivewealth appeared to 
differ in their choice of FINRA trade execution facility: Whereas the Drivewealth trades were reported to the FINRA trade reporting facility 
operated by NYSE, Robinhood’s trades were each reported to the facility operated by Nasdaq. 

Lastly, in rows 5A and 5B we present the results for a $10 buy order placed with Robinhood for Sirius XM Holdings Inc. (SIRI). At the time of 
the trade, the stock price for SIRI was less than $10 per share, allowing us to examine how dollar-based trades might yield a fractional share 
execution. As shown in the table, Robinhood split the trade into a fractional component of 0.557109 share as well as a whole share component. 
After locating the fractional component in the TAQ data, we calculated its reporting latency to be 227 milliseconds, similar to the first two 
Robinhood trades. In contrast, the whole share trade had a reporting latency of just 1.9 milliseconds and was sent to the NYSE TRF, rather than 
the Nasdaq TRF as had occurred with the fractional share trades executed by Robinhood. We therefore conclude that, consistent with Rob-
inhood’s trade disclosures, the whole share component of this trade was routed to a retail market maker for execution.  

(2)  Estimating the Distribution of Reporting Latencies. 

While  the  foregoing  evidence  is  suggestive  that  fractional  share  trades  executed  by  Robinhood  and  Drivewealth  possess  distinctive, 
observable characteristics, the small, non-random sample of our trades naturally raises the question of whether these reporting latencies appear 
in other trades. Nor does this small sample of trades permit estimating the full distribution of reporting latencies that should be expected of 
Robinhood’s and Drivewealth’s fractional share trades. 

To address both issues, we compare the reporting latency for all single share, non-exchange trades reported in TAQ during the final calendar 
quarter of 2020 with the same type of trades reported in TAQ during the final calendar quarter of 2021. In particular, trades during the last 
quarter of 2020 were made in a period prior to the time that Drivewealth commenced fractional share trades. Likewise, as discussed previously, 
Robinhood has disclosed in its securities filings that it did not commence reporting fractional share trades to FINRA until early 2021. Thus, 
comparing the distribution of reporting latencies for all trades during these two time periods—particularly in the region of 25 milliseconds and 
200 milliseconds—can provide insight into whether the latencies observed for our executed fractional share trades became more prevalent after 
Robinhood and Drivewealth began reporting fractional share trades to the tape. The fact that the reporting latencies for our trades were so large 
also points to a testable prediction: Trades with these observed latencies should be very rare in the 2020 Q4 sample but very common in the 
2021 Q4 sample. 

In Fig. A1, we compare the distribution of reporting latencies for all single share, non-exchange trades reported for both time periods. Panel A 
presents trades reported to the Nasdaq TRF (Panel A), and Panel B presents trades reported to the NYSE TRF. Based on our individual stock 
trades, we surmised that the Nasdaq TRF receives trade reports from Robinhood; therefore, in Panel A, our interest is in the change in the 
frequency of trades with latencies of approximately 200 milliseconds between 2020 Q4 and 2021 Q4. In contrast, our preliminary analysis 
indicated that the NYSE TRF receives Drivewealth’s trades; therefore, in Panel B, we focus on the distribution of latencies in the vicinity of 25 
milliseconds. 

As shown in Fig. A1, Panel A is quite consistent with our prediction, and the sharp increase in single share, non-exchange trades in this area of 
the latency distribution during 2021 Q4 suggests a Robinhood latency “signature” of approximately 135 to 300 milliseconds. The results in 
Panel B are likewise consistent with the prediction, insofar as there is a sharp increase in trades with latencies between 20 milliseconds and 40 
milliseconds during 2021 Q4, and (in contrast to Panel A) there also appears a general elevation of trades with latencies beyond 40 milli-
seconds. However, Panel B also reveals a sizeable number of trades with latencies between 25 milliseconds and 30 milliseconds during the 2020 
Q4 period, suggesting that some trades reported to the NYSE TRF with latencies bearing the Drivewealth latency “signature” may reflect trade 
executions by other firms. 

We conclude from this analysis that fractional share trades executed by Robinhood and Drivewealth should be discernable based on their 
reporting latencies; however, Panel A indicates that we may slightly undercount the presence of Robinhood’s trades, while Panel B suggests we 
may slightly overcount Drivewealth’s trades. 

Finally, examination of the full distribution of these data also reveals extensive positive skew in the 2021 Q4 distribution relative to the 2020 
Q4, with the more recent data having a large number of trades with unusually large latencies. To illustrate, we define a trade report for a single 

40  For instance, fractional share trades executed by retail investors will not sweep through the order book, nor will they be part of an integrated trading strategy (e. 
g., a VWAP trade). As such, aside from an indicator for an odd lot trade, fractional share trade reports should generally lack any other trade condition indicators. 
Other than for BRK.A, the only trade condition we would expect to see would therefore be “I”, indicating an odd lot trade. The size of a round lot for BRK.A is 1 share; 
therefore, there are no odd lot trades for this security. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383623R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

share FINRA trade as “delayed” if it has a reporting latency of more than 1 second, and we plot the daily total of these delayed reports for our 
two periods in Fig. A2. As shown in the figure, the incidence of such delayed trade reports spikes during the 2021 Q4 period for trade reports 
made to both the NYSE TRF and the Nasdaq TRF. Visual examination of the trade data indicate that the vast majority of these delayed trade 
reports are for trades executed at the commencement of the trading day. These delayed trade reports also have all of the other indicators of 
Robinhood or Drivewealth fractional share trades—in particular, with respect to size, trade condition and, in the case of Robinhood, with 
respect to midpoint pricing (as discussed in Section 5 of the main paper). We therefore explore below whether the accuracy of our classification 
rules can be improved by including these delayed trades as fractional share executions by Robinhood and Drivewealth. 

We use these results to define separate classification rules for Drivewealth and Robinhood fractional share trade executions. For trades in the 
TAQ data, we classify a single share, non-exchange trade as a Drivewealth fractional share trade if the trade: (a) was reported to the NYSE TRF 
facility and (b) had a reporting latency of more than 20 milliseconds. In contrast, we classify a single share, non-exchange trade as a Robinhood 
fractional share trade if the trade (a) was reported to the Nasdaq TRF facility, and (b) had a reporting latency of between 135 and 300 mil-
liseconds. For either Robinhood or Drivewealth trades, we also require that the trade condition be for an ordinary, non-ISO execution. In 
addition  to  these  latency  criteria,  we  also  examine  whether  our  classification  accuracy  for  Robinhood  can  be  enhanced  by  assigning  all 
“delayed” trades executed at the opening of the trading day and reported to the Nasdaq TRF to be Robinhood fractional share trades.41  

(3)  Evaluating the Classification Rules 

In conventional predictive modelling, classifiers such as the ones we constructed would be validated against a test dataset of trades that are 
known to have the target characteristic of interest (e.g., RH=0/1). Because we lack access to such a dataset, we turn instead to the OTC 
Transparency data to evaluate the accuracy of our classification rules. In particular, if the OTC Transparency data reveal that either Robinhood 
or Drivewealth executed only single share trades in a particular security during a trading week, the firm’s weekly trades in that security likely 
reflect fractional share trade executions. We therefore evaluate the extent to which applying our classifiers to the TAQ trade data results in 
weekly trade estimates for Robinhood and Drivewealth for all such stock-weeks that match their disclosures for these stock-weeks in the OTC 
Transparency data. 

To obtain our dataset of fractional share trade executions, we collect all stock-week disclosures in the OTC Transparency data for Robinhood 
and Drivewealth where the number of reported shares traded for each firm for a stock-week is no greater than 100.1% the number of reported 
shares for the firm during that stock-week. Because neither Robinhood nor Drivewealth reported fractional share trades to FINRA prior to 2021, 
we focus on trades occurring from the week of Monday, January 4, 2021 to the week of Monday, March 28, 2022. These filters result in a dataset 
of 16,781 stock-weeks across 902 securities for Robinhood, and 17,593 stock-weeks across 1,039 securities for Drivewealth.42 

In Fig. A3, we use trades in BRK.A to illustrate the comparison we make given that BRK.A’s unusually high stock price make it a popular stock 
for fractional share trading among users of Robinhood and Drivewealth. Indeed, during our sample period, these two firms are the only retail 
brokerage firms specifically listed as trading shares in BRK.A in the OTC Transparency data. Moreover, each firm consistently reports weekly 
trades and weekly shares traded in BRK.A that are the same number, indicating that these weekly trades represent fractional share executions. 
Nor should this fact be surprising given BRK.A’s high stock price. In Panel A, we compare the weekly trades reported for Robinhood in the OTC 
Transparency data (represented by solid bars) with the weekly estimates for Robinhood’s trades based on the trades in the TAQ data using the 
Robinhood classification rule described previously. Note that the rule we use for Panel A requires all trades to have a reporting latency of 135 to 
300 milliseconds to be classified as a Robinhood trade; therefore, it does not classify any “delayed” trades as Robinhood trades. 

Overall, Panel A indicates that this classification rule comes close to estimating the exact number of weekly trades in BRK.A reported for 
Robinhood in the OTC Transparency data, but only after the week of February 16, 2021. For instance, after March 1, the estimated number of 
Robinhood trades in Panel A is roughly 86% of the number reported for Robinhood in the OTC Transparency data. As suspected, however, the 
estimated number of Robinhood trades does appear to miss several trades each day, likely due to the fact that many trades executed at 9:30 a.m. 
have characteristics of Robinhood’s fractional share trades (i.e., they are single share, non-exchange midpoint trades reported the Nasdaq TRF) 
but have very large reporting latencies, so they are not captured by this classification rule. In Panel B, we therefore present the results using the 
same classification rule for Robinhood, but we allow a Robinhood trade to have either (a) a reporting latency of between 135 and 300 mil-
liseconds, or (b) a reporting latency of greater than 135 milliseconds if it was executed between 8:55:00 and 09:30:10. As shown in Panel B, this 
modified rule results in a notable improvement in estimating the number of reported fractional share trades for Robinhood. Using this rule, the 
estimated number of Robinhood trades in Panel B is roughly 95% of the number reported in the OTC Transparency data from the week of March 
1, 2021 through the week of March 28, 2022. In addition, the fact that both versions of our Robinhood classification rule shows a sudden 
increase in Robinhood trades over the two-week period beginning on February 16, 2021 also indicates that Robinhood commenced reporting its 
fractional share trades to the tape at around this time. 

In Panel C, we present a similar comparison using the classification rule for Drivewealth. As with Panels A and B, the figure highlights a 
sudden increase in estimated Drivewealth trades beginning well into 2021, in the week of October 4, 2021. After this date, our classification 
rule for Drivewealth trades performs even better than the classifier for Robinhood trades. Across the twenty-five weeks between October 11, 
2021 and March 28, 2022, the estimated number of weekly Drivewealth trades in BRK.A based on our classifier is identical to the number of 
trades reported for Drivewealth in the OTC Transparency data for twelve of these weeks. Moreover, on those weeks when the two numbers 
differed, the difference is typically less than 10 trades. 

Based on this analysis, we adopt a classification rule for Robinhood fractional share trades that includes “delayed” trades at the open. In main 
text, we provide a discussion of the performance of the Robinhood and Drviewealth classifiers using all stock-weeks in the OTC Transparency 
Data. 

41  We do not explore this consideration for Drivewealth trades because we classify all single share, non-exchange trades as Drivewealth fractional share trades if the 
reporting latency for a trade is greater than 20 milliseconds and the trade otherwise meets our classification criteria for Drivewealth fractional share trades.  
42  Because Drivewealth continues to backfill its OTC disclosures, we expect these report numbers to change as it completes this process. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383624R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

(4)  Utilizing this approach beyond March 2022 

For researchers interested in examining RHDW fractional share trading beyond March 31, 2022, one concern with adopting this approach to 
estimate fractional share trading is that technological changes over time might change the accuracy of these two classification rules. In this 
regard, because each firm’s “signature” might change over time, it is important to update and validate each firm’s signature using the OTC 
Transparency data. Indeed, in related work examining fractional share trading in BRK.A, we find that the accuracy of our DW classification rule 
deteriorates after October 6, 2022 based on Drivewealth’s OTC Transparency disclosures. In light of this discovery, we therefore updated the 
DW signature after October 6, 2022 by placing several additional fractional share trades in BRK.A through Cash App (an introducing broker for 
Drivewealth)  and examined  their trade reports  in  the TAQ data. This  process  revealed that on October  6,  2022 Drivewealth  appeared to 
transition to reporting its fractional share trades to the Nasdaq TRF (rather than to the NYSE TRF as it did through March 31, 2022), but its 
reporting latencies otherwise appeared the same as before. Using this new information to update the classification rule for fractional share 
trades executed by Drivewealth after October 6, 2022, we were able again to predict accurately the weekly OTC Transparency disclosures for 
Drivewealth. This example illustrates how our framework can be extended to more recent trading periods, though it is incumbent on re-
searchers to validate and, if applicable, seek to update the classification rules, to ensure that estimated fractional share trades for RHDW 
continue to track their OTC Transparency disclosures.

Fig. A1Reporting Latencies for Trades Reported to the Nasdaq TRF (Panel A) and the NYSE TRF (Panel B). 
This figure illustrates the tail distribution of reporting latencies for all single share, non-exchange trades reported in TAQ for trades reported to the Nasdaq TRF (Panel 
A) and the NYSE TRF (Panel B) during the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2021. 

Fig. A2Incidence of Extended Reporting Delays by Day, 2020 Q4 vs. 2021 Q4. 
This figure illustrates the the daily number of single share FINRA trades having “delayed” transaction reports for trades reported to the Nasdaq TRF (blue dots) and 
the NYSE TRF (red dots) during the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2021. We define a trade report for a single share FINRA trade as 
“delayed” if it has a reporting latency of more than 1 second.  

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383625R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. A3Fractional Trades in BRK.A Reported in the OTC Transparency Data for Robinhood (Panels A & B) and Drivewealth (Panel C) vs. Fractional Trades Estimated 
in TAQ with Classification Rules.   

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383626R.P. Bartlett et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

References 

Barber, B., Huang, X., Jorion, P., Odean, T., Schwarz, C., 2022b. A (sub)penny for your 

thoughts: Tracking retail activity in TAQ. J. Finance forthcoming.  

Barber, B., Huang, X., Odean, T., Schwarz, C., 2022a. Attention induced trading and 

returns: Evidence from robinhood users. J. Finance 77, 3141–3190. 

Barber, B., Odean, T., Zhu, N., 2009. Do retail trades move markets? Rev. Financ. Stud. 

22, 151–186. 

Barrot, J-N., Kaniel, R., Sraer, D., 2016. Are retail trades compensated for providing 

liquidity? J. financ. econ. 120, 146–168. 

Bartlett, R., McCrary, J., 2019. How rigged are stock markets? Evidence from 

microsecond timestamps. J. Financ. Markets 45, 37–60. 

Bartlett, R., McCrary, J., O’Hara, M., 2022. A fractional solution to a stock market 

mystery, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4167890 or 10.2139/ssr 
n.4167890. 

Battalio, R., Jennings, R., Saglam, M., Wu, J., 2023, Identifying market maker trades as 
“retail’ from TAQ: No shortage of false negatives and false positives, SSRN: htt 
ps://ssrn.com/abstract=4579159. 

Boehmer, E., Jones, C.M., Zhang, X., Zhang, X., 2021. Tracking retail investor activity. 

J. Finance 76, 2249–2305. 

Chen, Jiafeng, Roth, J., 2023. Logs with zeros? Some problems and solutions. Quarterly 

J. Econ. forthcoming.  

Eaton, G., Green, T., Roseman, B., Wu, Y., 2022. Retail option trading and the implied 

volatility surface, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4104788. 
Da, Z., Fang, V.W., Wenwei, L., 2024. Fractional share trading. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Forthcoming.  

Foucault, T., Sraer, D., Thesmer, D., 2011. Individual investors and volatility. J. Finance 

66, 1369–1405. 

Hirshleifer, D., Teoh, S.H., 2003. Herd behaviour and cascading in capital markets: a 

review and synthesis. Eur. Financ. Manag. 9, 25–66. 

Jones, C., Zhang, X., Zhang, X., 2022. Retail investors in the pandemic, Available at 

SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4151106. 

Kaniel, R., Saar, G., Titman, S., 2008. Individual investor sentiment and stock returns. 

J. Finance 63, 273–310. 

Klausner, M., Ohlrogge, M., Ruan, E., 2021. A sober look at SPACs. Yale J. Regul. 39, 

1

1

1

1

1

1

228–303. 

Lee, C., Radhakrishna, B., 2000. Inferring investor behavior: evidence from TORQ data. 

J. Financ. Markets 3, 83–111. 

Moss, A., Naughton, J., Wang, C., 2023. The irrelevance of environmental, social, and 

governance disclosure to retail investors. Manag. Sci. forthcoming.  

O’Hara, M., Yao, C., Ye, M., 2014. What’s Not There: Odd Lots and Market Data. 

J. Finance 65, 2199–2236. 

O’Hara, M., 2015. High frequency market microstructure. J. Financ. Econ. 116, 257–270. 
Shearer, M., 2022. Modeling Trading Strategies in Financial Markets with Data, 

Simulation, and Deep Reinforcement Learning. University of Michigan. Dissertation.  

Welch, I., 2021. The wisdom of the robinhood crowd. J. Finance 77, 1489–1527. 

I

I

@

@

I

D

D

D

D

D

D

.

5
4
4
8
6
6
4
7
4
$

,

.

0
9
9
3
0
2
2
7
4
$

,

.

0
3
7
7
8
9
4
$

,

.

0
8
6
4
0
8
9
8
4
$

,

5
6
3
6
$

.

5
6
3
6
$

.

1
2
0
0
0
0
0

.

2
0
0
0
0
0
0

.

0
0
2
0
0
0
0

.

2
0
0
0
0
0
0

.

9
0
1
7
5
5
0

.

0
0
0
0
0
0
1

.

.

A
K
R
B

.

A
K
R
B

R
V
N

.

A
K
R
B

I
R
I
S

I
R
I
S

.

0
0
0
1
$

0
0
1
$

.

0
0
1
$

.

0
0
1
$

.

.

0
0
0
1
$

)
4
1
(

)
3
1
(

)
2
1
(

)
1
1
(

)
0
1
(

)
9
(

)
8
(

)
7
(

)
6
(

)
5
(

)
4
(

)
3
(

)
2
(

)
1
(

.
)
4
(

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

)
1
(

s
n
m
u
l
o
c

n
i

d
e
t
s
i
l

e
r
a

d
e
d
a
r
t

k
c
o
t
s

d
n
a

,
e
u
l
a
v

e
d
a
r
t

,

d
e
s
u

r
e
k
o
r
b

,
e
t
a
d

e
h
T

.
s
e
d
a
r
t

h
t
l
a
e
w
e
v
i
r
D
d
n
a

d
o
o
h
n
i
b
o
R
f
o

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

e
d
a
r
t

e
h
t

e
n
i
m
a
x
e

o
t

d
e
s
u

s
e
d
a
r
t

e
v
fi
r
o
f

s
e
l
p
m
a
x
e

s
e
d
i
v
o
r
p

e
l
b
a
t

s
i
h
T

n
i
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t
g
n
i
t
a
c
o
l
n
o
p
u
d
e
n
i
a
t
b
o
a
t
a
d
e
d
i
v
o
r
p
)
4
1
(
h
g
u
o
r
h
t

)
7
(

s
n
m
u
l
o
C

.
e
d
a
r
t
h
c
a
e
r
o
f
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
fi
n
o
c
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t
n
o
d
e
s
a
b
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t

f
o
e
c
i
r
p
e
r
a
h
s

r
e
p
e
h
t
d
n
a
d
e
s
a
h
c
r
u
p
e
r
a
h
s
a
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f
e
h
t

t
r
o
p
e
r

)
6
(
d
n
a
)
5
(

s
n
m
u
l
o
C

.

K
R
B
n
a
h
t

r
e
h
t
o
s
k
c
o
t
s

l
l
a
r
o
f

s
e
r
a
h
s
0
0
1
n
a
h
t

r
e
w
e
f

r
o
f
e
d
a
r
t
a
s
i
h
c
i
h
w

,
e
d
a
r
t

t
o
l
d
d
o
n
a
s
e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i

”
I
“
(
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t

r
o
f
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

)
y
n
a
f
i
(
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t

s
i

D
N
O
C
S
_
R
T

.
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t
g
n
i
t
r
o
p
e
r
e
u
n
e
v
e
h
t

s
i

X
E
.
e
l
fi
e
d
a
r
t

Q
A
T
e
h
t

.
t
n
e
s

s
a
w

t
r
o
p
e
r
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t
h
c
i
h
w
o
t
y
t
i
l
i
c
a
f
g
n
i
t
r
o
p
e
r
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t

s
i
F
R
R
T

_

.
a
t
a
d
e
d
a
r
t

Q
A
T
e
h
t
n
i
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

s
a
h
c
a
e
,
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t

f
o
e
c
i
r
p
e
h
t

s
i

I

Q
A
T
_
E
C
R
P
d
n
a
,
e
d
a
r
t
e
h
t

f
o
e
z
i
s
e
h
t

s
i
E
Z
I
S
.
)
e
r
a
h
s
1
o
t

l
a
u
q
e
t
o
l
d
n
u
o
r
a
s
a
h
h
c
i
h
w

,

A

.

M
_
E
M
I
T

d
n
a

E
M
I
T
_
T
R
A
P

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
d
n
o
c
e
s
i
l
l
i

m

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
n

e
h
t

s
i

y
c
n
e
t
a
L

d
n
a

,
y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r

,
p
m
a
t
s
e
m

i
t

P
I
S

e
h
t

d
n
a

p
m
a
t
s
e
m

i
t

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

e
h
t

e
r
a
M
_
E
M
I
T

d
n
a

E
M
I
T
_
T
R
A
P

1
A
e
l
b
a
T

Q
A
T
_
E
C
I
R
P

E
Z
I
S

D
N
O
C
S
_
R
T

X
E

e
c
i
r
P

d
e
a
h
c
r
u
P

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

l
o
b
m
y
S

e
u
l
a
V
e
d
a
r
T

:
e
l
i
F

e
d
a
r
T
Q
A
T
m
o
r
F

:

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
fi
n
o
C
e
d
a
r
T
m
o
r
F

y
c
n
e
t
a
L

.

7
9
1
5
2

.

9
4
0
1
2

7
0
6
2

.

9
2
3
2

.

.

2
3
7
2
2

7
9
1

.

0
8
4
8
4
7
7
1
4
4
1
2
1
3
1

:

:

.

0
0
0
7
7
7
5
6
1
4
1
2
1
3
1

:

:

.

M
_
E
M
I
T

E
M
I
T
_
T
R
A
P

6
1
6
3
2
6
2
3
7
0
5
1
1
0
1

:

:

.

0
0
0
5
3
1
2
2
5
0
5
1
1
0
1

:

:

.

0
4
8
7
6
0
8
4
2
8
1
6
0
3
1

:

:

.

0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
8
1
6
0
3
1

:

:

.

8
4
4
8
8
2
5
6
7
7
0
0
4
2
1

:

:

.

0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
7
7
0
0
4
2
1

:

:

.

0
3
4
1
0
5
1
4
9
8
3
9
4
3
1

:

:

.

0
0
0
7
7
1
4
1
7
8
3
9
4
3
1

:

:

.

7
8
6
6
0
4
8
1
8
8
3
9
4
3
1

:

:

.

4
2
4
1
4
4
6
1
8
8
3
9
4
3
1

:

:

.

q
a
d
s
a
N

q
a
d
s
a
N

F
R
_
R
T

E
S
Y
N

E
S
Y
N

q
a
d
s
a
N

E
S
Y
N

.

5
4
4
8
6
6
4
7
4
$

,

.

0
9
9
3
0
2
2
7
4
$

,

.

0
3
7
7
8
9
4
$

,

.

0
8
6
4
0
8
9
8
4
$

,

5
6
3
6
$

.

5
6
3
6
$

.

d
o
o
h
n
i
b
o
R

d
o
o
h
n
i
b
o
R

r
e
k
o
r
B

d
o
o
h
n
i
b
o
R

d
o
o
h
n
i
b
o
R

p
p
A
h
s
a
C

p
p
A
h
s
a
C

3
0
2
0
2
2
0
2

4
0
2
0
2
2
0
2

3
0
3
0
2
2
0
2

3
0
3
0
2
2
0
2

7
0
3
0
2
2
0
2

7
0
3
0
2
2
0
2

1

2

3

4

A
5

B
5

E
T
A
D

#
e
d
a
r
T

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10383627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
