Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

When the markets get CO.V.I.D: COntagion, Viruses, and Information
Diffusion✩
Maria Jose Arteaga-Garavito a, Mariano M. Croce a,b,c,∗, Paolo Farroni d, Isabella Wolfskeil e
a Bocconi University, via Sarfatti, 25, Milano, 20123, Italy
b CEPR, London, UK
c Baffi and IGIER, Milan, Italy
d Bank of Italy, via Nazionale, Rome, Italy
e Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We quantify the exposure of major financial markets to news shocks about global contagion risk while
accounting for local epidemic conditions. For a wide cross section of countries, we construct a novel dataset
comprising (i) announcements related to COVID19 and (ii) high-frequency data on epidemic news diffused
through Twitter (Hassan et al., 2019’s methodology). We provide novel empirical evidence about financial
dynamics both around epidemic announcements and at daily/intra-daily frequencies. Analysis of contagion
data and social media activity about COVID19 suggest that the market price of contagion risk is significant.

Dataset link: when the markets get covid (Refer
ence data)

JEL classification:
G12
G15
I10

Keywords:
Asset prices
Pandemic risk
Medical announcements
Text analysis

1. Introduction

COVID19 has manifested itself as a very aggressive and fast epi-
demic that – at the time of the first draft of this paper – brought
major economic countries to their knees.1 Given the fast-increasing
contagion curve of COVID19 and its global scale, this epidemic event
is challenging common economic policy interventions and depressing
the global value of our assets, i.e., the financial wealth of millions of
households all over the world.

Given that severe virus-related crises are expected to become more
frequent, we find it relevant to use COVID-19-related data to ask the

following broad questions about financial market reactions to viral con-
tagion risk. First, what is the average impact of medical announcements
on financial returns? Equivalently, is the diffusion of this information
enhancing wealth or adding risk? Second, what is the market price
of news risk related to global contagion dynamics? Third, can local
contagion conditions help us predict expected returns?

Last but not least, can we use social media activity to measure
the production and diffusion of information about epidemic risk? This
question is important for at least two reasons. First, fast epidemic
outbreaks catch investors off guard; hence, real-time indexes based on

✩

Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We are grateful to both the editor and an anonymous referee for their valuable comments. We thank Charles
Wyplosz and an anonymous referee for COVID Economics for early feedback, as well as our discussants: Antonio Mele, Alexander Chinco and Naveen Gondhi.
We are grateful to Martina Barni for her excellent research assistantship. We thank the Bocconi COVID Crisis Lab and the participants to the Bocconi Finance
Seminars, the JABES Seminars, the Collegio Carlo Alberto Finance Conference, the joint IMF and World Bank seminar series, the Finance Department of UTD,
the FRB Seminars, the Finance Cavalcade Conference, the EEA Conference, the RCEA conference, the ICEA Conference, the Resilient Society Conference, the EFA,
the SED and the BdI-FRB Conference. This article expresses the authors’ views and does not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Italy. Additionally, the article
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve
System.

∗ Corresponding author at: Bocconi University, via Sarfatti, 25, Milano, 20123, Italy.

@MajoArteaga (M.J. Arteaga-Garavito), @MCroce_MacroFin (M.M. Croce), @Pfarroni1 (P. Farroni), @WolfskeilI (I. Wolfskeil).

E-mail address: mmc287@gmail.com (M.M. Croce).

1 Our first draft is dated 3/23/2020. To assess the severity of COVID19, see the March 11, 2020 WHO Director-General’s opening remarks (https://www.who.

int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103850
Received 29 June 2023; Received in revised form 8 April 2024; Accepted 12 April 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)103850Availableonline13May20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

social media news may function as a useful predictive tool. Second,
estimating multidimensional models requires many observations that
we may gather by using high-frequency data instead of waiting for daily
medical bulletins.

In this study, we address these questions by quantifying the expo-
sure of major financial markets to news shocks about global contagion
risk accounting for local epidemic conditions. For a broad cross-section
of countries, we construct a novel data set comprising (i) medical
announcements related to COVID-19; and (ii) high-frequency data on
epidemic news diffused through Twitter (among others, see Hassan
et al., 2019; van Binsbergen et al., 2022). Across several classes of
financial assets and currencies, we provide novel empirical evidence
about financial dynamics (i) around epidemic announcements, (ii) at
a daily frequency, and (iii) at an intra-daily frequency. Formal es-
timations based on contagion data and social media activity about
COVID-19 confirm that the market price of epidemic risk is very
significant. Hence prudential policies that mitigate global contagion or
local diffusion may be extremely valuable for financial wealth. More
broadly, we offer a methodology for constructing a rich framework of
information diffusion and information attention that future empiricists
can adapt to examine future sources of global crises.

Interpretation of our findings. Before describing our findings in more
detail, we must clarify how to interpret them. There is no doubt that the
COVID pandemic was unprecedented in many dimensions (Baker et al.,
2020). Nevertheless, our high-frequency social-media-based approach
can also be informative when adapted to future pandemic events.
Tracking pandemic-related sentiment and contagion dynamics can be
fundamental to portfolio managers in future pandemic events. In this
sense, our analysis is not simply a case study of a unique, rare event.
Rather, it is very flexible as it shows how to gather a rich-and-reliable
dataset for formal statistical tests even after a few weeks from the be-
ginning of a ‘brand new’ pandemic. Given our high-frequency approach,
we can track the full evolution of the pandemic across multiple different
contagion waves. Furthermore, our methodology is broad as it allows
financial economists to study many relevant dimensions of financial
markets (see, for example, Hassan et al., 2020).

In addition, after having collected more than 15,800 medical an-
nouncements across many countries, our results on the positive average
appreciation of equity markets can be reasonably interpreted as a
statement on expected appreciation. Our novel and sizeable dataset
should minimize concerns about ‘peso problems’.

Even though we aim to provide a flexible set of tools for future
pandemic-related studies, we acknowledge that future crises may dif-
fer from the COVID one. In this case, future research should adopt
our seminal approach as already done, for example, in the financial
intermediation literature, to analyze rare-but-severe global financial
crises.

Current results in detail. An important contribution of our work is the
collection of a novel dataset on the COVID-19 pandemic that includes
(i) an extensive set of official announcements on medical conditions
(more than 16,000 announcements) and (ii) news diffused on Twitter
in real-time by major newspapers (based on more than 823,000 tweets).
We identify major newspapers for a large cross-section of countries in
the spirit of Baker et al. (2016). We do not analyze articles; instead, we
track news published on Twitter in real-time to produce high-frequency
data when needed.

More specifically, we track tweets posted by major newspapers with
keywords such as ‘coronavirus’ and ‘covid19’. For each newspaper, we
use the location of its headquarters to identify its specific time zone.
As a result, we gather thousands of tweets for a large cross-section
of countries that we can aggregate at different frequencies and across
regions.

Given this data set, we document several important facts about
news diffusion. First, both Twitter-based news diffusion (measured by
the number of tweets) and attention (measured by the number of

retweets) spike upon contagion-related announcements. Second and
more broadly, the diffusion of information increases substantially in
each country in our data set as soon as that country goes into an
epidemic state.2 Third, our measured increase in information diffusion
is particularly pronounced precisely during the hours in which financial
markets are open. All of these empirical facts suggest that tracking
Twitter-diffused news is a reliable way to capture the information set
of investors at a high frequency.

Turning our attention to financial dynamics, we look at equity
returns around announcements, that is, in a ±60 minute window.
We find that cumulative equity returns jump upward in the post-
announcement time window. This result is robust across several differ-
ent specifications. In addition, we conduct the same analysis by looking
at the government bond market and find a small decline in advanced
economies (henceforth AEs) and no adjustment in emerging economies
(henceforth EEs). We show that these results are consistent with a sim-
ple model in which the (i) demand of assets (see, for example, Koijen
and Yogo, 2019) is driven by agents who care about the timing of
resolution of cash-flow uncertainty; and (ii) the supply of bonds is less
upward sloping than the supply of equities. Our high-frequency result
is also consistent with the results documented by Gormsen and Koijen
(2020) looking at dividend futures.

According to an LDA model applied to our tweets (in the spirit of By-
bee et al., 2020a), cases are one of the main drivers of the topics that
received attention during the pandemic. Accordingly, in the last step of
our analysis, we group countries into three portfolios daily according
to their relative number of COVID-19 cases. We do this separately for
AEs and EEs. The H (L) portfolio comprises the equity returns of the
top (bottom) countries in terms of COVID-19 contagion cases. We then
estimate a no-arbitrage based model in which we allow for time-varying
betas (𝛽𝑖,𝑡) with respect to global contagion risk. Specifically, we allow
equity returns to respond to global viral contagion news according
to each portfolio’s relative share of official COVID-19 cases. Global
contagion risk is measured either by innovations in the growth rate of
global COVID-19 contagion cases or by innovations in the tone of our
COVID-19-related tweets.

This model can capture many of the features of equity returns that
we document in our descriptive analysis. First, this model captures
predictability through contagion-based time-varying betas. Second, this
specification has the potential to capture higher negative skewness for
countries that go through more severe contagion paths.3 Third, this
model accounts for heterogeneous exposure to global contagion news,
enabling us to identify the market price of risk of this global contagion
component.

Across all of our specifications, the market price of contagion risk
is both statistically significant and extremely high. Equities are more
exposed to risk than bonds. Both within AEs and EEs, heterogeneous
exposure to contagion risk is substantial, and as a result, an equity-
based HML-COVID strategy bears a high risk premium. An HML-COVID
strategy that goes long in bonds of countries with a larger share of cases
and short in those with a smaller share of cases, instead, provides an
insurance premium. This suggests that bonds tend to become safer in
countries exposed to heightened contagion risk. We find that this result
is particularly sizable among EEs.

2 We identify the beginning of the epidemic state with the day on which
the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases becomes greater than or equal to
100.

3 Consider the case of portfolio H comprising countries receiving a sequence
of relatively more severe contagion news. This portfolio will have greater
exposure to adverse news (|𝛽𝐻,𝑡| increases) as the relative contagion share of
the portfolio grows. As the relative contagion share starts to flatten out and
eventually decline, the sensitivity of this portfolio to good news is reduced
(|𝛽𝐻,𝑡| shrinks), meaning that returns will be less sensitive to positive news
and hence the right tail of their distribution will not be very long.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038502M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

These results conform well with the data on weekly international
investment flows. Countries with lower (higher) contagion levels are
expected to experience equity inflows (outflows). Expected inflows are
stronger in AEs than in EEs. In contrast, when looking at bonds, these
findings are almost absent in AEs and reversed in EEs, meaning that
in high-covid emerging economies, the flows going toward government
bonds increase. This is consistent with the idea that bonds are perceived
as safer assets in EEs.

In order to further exploit our rich framework, we consider a more
granular cross section by looking at industry-level equity indices in
Europe. This task is relevant for at least two reasons: (i) industries are
well known to be difficult to price; and (ii) our industries comprise
firms based in different countries and hence their riskiness is based
on an interesting mix of country-level contagion conditions. Our esti-
mation confirms that the market price of contagion risk is significant.
In addition, we find relevant heterogeneity in risk exposure across
industries.

In the last step of our analysis, we run intra-day regressions tak-
ing advantage of our high-frequency Twitter-based risk measure. We
focus on European countries whose markets are open simultaneously,
namely, ITA, ESP, UK, FRA, DEU, CHE, and SWE. Every day, we group
them into three portfolios according to their relative number of COVID-
19 cases measured in the previous 24 h. The H (L) portfolio comprises
the equity returns of the top-2 (bottom-2) countries for COVID-19
contagion cases.

Our novel high-frequency estimation confirms our main findings:
contagion risk carries a significant market price of risk. Hence policies
related to the prevention and containment of contagion could be valu-
able not only in terms of lives saved but also in terms of global financial
wealth. These results also hold after controlling for the market and
changes in equity volatility. Our results have been very stable over time
and can be explored at https://sites.google.com/view/when-markets-
get-covid/, a website that we use for the visualization of our data.

Related literature. Due to its relevance, the COVID-19 crisis has spurred
a lot of contemporaneous research (Goldstein et al., 2021). An im-
portant strand of the literature focuses on the measurement of both
COVID-19-induced uncertainty and firm-level risk exposure by utilizing
textual analysis and surveys (see, for example, Hassan et al., 2020;
Giglio et al., 2020). We focus on high-frequency data, Twitter-based
news diffusion, epidemic announcements, and country-level asset price
dynamics.

Within the literature that studies news coverage and reaction to
news, our manuscript is methodologically related to the work of, among
others, (van Binsbergen et al., 2022), (Bianchi et al., 2021), (Hassan
et al., 2019), (Manela and Moreira, 2017), (Garmaise et al., 2021), (By-
bee et al., 2020b), (Schmeling and Wagner, 2023) and (Engle et al.,
2020).

Many studies look at the financial implications of COVID-19 (see,
among others, Augustin et al., 2021; Bonaccolto et al., 2019; Bretscher
et al., 2020a,b; Albuquerque et al., 2020; Ramelli and Wagner, 2020;
Pástor and Vorsatz, 2020, Papanikolaou and Schmidt, 2020, Breugem
et al., 2022; Kaniel and Wang, 2020). In contrast to us, they do not
focus on medical announcements and they do not assess the market
price of viral contagion risk.

Several studies focus on firm-level implications (see, among other,
Cororaton and Rosen, 2020; Acharya and Steffen, 2020; Carletti et al.,
2020). Hartley and Rebucci (2020) and Sinagl (2020) look at monetary
policy announcements and cash-flow risk, respectively. We differ in our
attention to medical announcements; our social media-based measures
of information diffusion and attention; and our high frequency analysis.
Our work complements the evidence in Gormsen and Koijen (2020)
and Gormsen et al. (2021) who extract relevant information about
expectations and risk premia from derivatives.

authors show that the weakness of mutual funds targeting corporate
bonds has significantly exacerbated the drop in corporate bond prices.
Our model is silent on the role played by risky bonds. We leave the
analysis of the link between medical announcements and international
corporate bond risk premia to future research.

2. Medical announcements

In this section, we propose a simple model to think of asset de-
mand around announcements. The model suggests that, on average,
announcements should produce a reallocation from bonds to equities.
As a result, equities should appreciate upon announcement, whereas
bond prices should stay stable (decline) if their supply is flat (upward
sloping). We test these predictions in our novel data set compris-
ing thousands of COVID-19-related announcements across twenty-one
countries. We then show our main results. Specifically, we document
that: (i) equity markets, on average, appreciate upon announcements,
and especially so in EEs; (ii) bond prices decline slightly in AEs, but
stay stable in EEs; (iii) across both AEs and EEs, trade becomes more
active upon medical announcements.

2.1. A simple model of assets demand and announcements

Consider an agent with Epstein and Zin (1989) recursive preferences

over two times in a period, 𝑡 = 0, 1:

[

𝑈0 =

(1 − 𝛿)𝐶 1−1∕𝜓

0

+ 𝛿𝐸0

] 1−1∕𝜓
1−𝛾

[

𝐶 1−𝛾
1

] 1

1−1∕𝜓

.

For the sake of simplicity, consider the case in which the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution is one, 𝜓 = 1, and consumption at time 0 is
equal to one, 𝐶0 = 1. Without loss of generality, impose a subjective
discount rate 𝛿 = 1. If consumption is log-normal, the following applies:

𝑈0 = 𝐸0[𝐶 1−𝛾

1

1
1−𝛾 ≈ 𝐸0[𝐶1] −

]

1
2

(𝛾 − 1)𝑉0[𝐶1],

(1)

meaning that when 𝛾 = 1, the agent cares only about expected utility,
𝐸0[𝐶1], whereas when 𝛾 > 1 the agent dislikes uncertainty, 𝑉0[𝐶1]. At
time 𝑡 = 0, the agent chooses how many bonds, 𝐵, and stocks, 𝑆, to
buy taking as given prices along their supply curves. Think of 𝐵 and 𝑆
as the face value and the book value of bonds and stocks, respectively.
The agent faces the following problem:

𝑈0(𝑊0) = max
𝐵,𝑆

𝐸0[𝐵 + 𝜃𝑆] −

𝑊0

≥ 𝑝(𝐵)𝐵 + 𝑝(𝑆)𝑆,

1
2

(𝛾 − 1)𝑉0[𝐵 + 𝜃𝑆],

(2)

where 𝜃 is a random variable that captures the riskiness of equity
payouts. Since 𝑉0[𝐵 + 𝜃𝑆] = 𝑆2𝑉0[𝜃], the implied demand curves for
bonds and equities are:

𝑝(𝑆)
𝑝(𝐵)

= 𝐸0[𝜃] − (𝛾 − 1)𝑉0[𝜃] ⋅ 𝑆

𝑝(𝐵) =

𝑊0 − 𝑆𝑝(𝑆)
𝐵

.

(3)

Assume that the supply of bonds is perfectly controlled by the central
bank so that 𝑝(𝐵) = 𝑃 . Without loss of generality, assume that 𝑃 = 1.
Assume that the supply of equity is linear and upward sloping,

𝑝𝑠(𝑆) = 𝑎 +

𝑆,

𝑏
⏟⏟⏟
>0

(4)

where we impose 𝑎 < 𝐸0[𝜃]. Under these conditions, at the equilibrium,

𝑆 =

𝐸0[𝜃] − 𝑎
(𝛾 − 1)𝜎2 + 𝑏

> 0.

(5)

Darmouni et al. (2023) studies the US corporate bond market
fragility and assess policy interventions in times of COVID-19. The

We think of an announcement as an unbiased signal about 𝜃 that
arrives at time 𝑡 ∈ (0, 1) and that reduces the posterior uncertainty

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038503M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics for announcements. This table shows summary statistics for
COVID19-related announcements that we collect for a large cross section of countries.
Our real-time data range from 01/01/2020 to 02/22/2022. For each country, we report
the total number of announcements, the fraction of announcements that report the
number of positive COVID cases, that are live streamed, and that are announced by
the country’s President or Prime Minister. In the last column, we report the fraction
of announcements that took place at a daily regular time.

Country

Total no.
announcements

Case
reports

Live
streamed

President/
Prime minister

Regularly
scheduled

AR
AU
BR
CA
CH
CL
CN
CN-HK
CO
DE
ES
FR
IN
IT
JA
KR
MX
NZ
UK
US

605
678
975
791
627
896
721
1,376
1,006
283
570
567
759
654
332
642
1,803
457
711
1,386

Total

15,839

33%
78%
64%
58%
78%
59%
82%
55%
58%
87%
83%
77%
89%
74%
59%
80%
10%
61%
82%
17%

64%

64%
4%
26%
21%
9%
29%
3%
2%
34%
1%
1%
16%
1%
17%
5%
1%
45%
29%
11%
54%

18%

3%
1%
2%
18%
13%
3%
1%
1%
8%
7%
17%
6%
1%
8%
5%
4%
21%
7%
7%
7%

7%

90%
34%
54%
31%
73%
45%
75%
100%
79%
61%
63%
84%
63%
81%
32%
72%
51%
72%
68%
33%

62%

about equities, 𝜎2 (Ai and Bansal, 2018). The agent can freely revise
her portfolio composition upon the arrival of the announcement. Since
we can prove that,

𝜕𝑝(𝑆)
𝜕𝜎2

< 0

if

𝛾 > 1 and

𝜕𝑝(𝑆)
𝜕𝜎2

= 0 if

𝛾 = 1,

(6)

if the investor cares about the timing of information (𝛾 > 1), on
average announcements should be associated to equity appreciation as
the investors shift their allocation toward equities. In what follows, we
work with a novel dataset of covid-related announcements to test this
hypothesis. In addition, we point out that if the supply curve of bonds
is slightly upward sloping instead of being flat, we should expect to see
both an average appreciation for equities and a depreciation for bonds,
respectively.

Our data collection is very comprehensive, as documented in Ta-
ble 1, and it comprises more than 15,000 medical announcements. An
example of a COVID-19-related announcement follows:

2020-03-14 15:35:00 CET; Vice President @Mike_Pence and
members of the Coronavirus Task Force will hold a press brief-
ing at 12:00 p.m. ET. Watch LIVE: http://45.wh.gov/RtVRmD

We ‘hand-collect’ these announcements in several ways. First, for each
country, we look for official press statements publicly available on the
local Ministry of Health (MoH) webpage. Suppose the press statement
does not have an official time stamp. In that case, we look for it on
the official Twitter account of the MoH or other related government
entities (for example, the Twitter account of the Prime Minister). If
this second attempt fails, we also look at the Twitter accounts of major
local newspapers and focus on news about medical reports. These steps,
which we repeat multiple times each week, are sufficient to identify
the effective time of each announcement in our data set relevant for
financial investors.

Our dataset comprises mostly regularly scheduled announcements,
that is, daily releases at a pre-established well-known time. We also
collected irregularly pre-scheduled announcements. As an example of
an irregularly pre-scheduled announcement, in Fig. 1, we report our
record of the first scheduled Coronavirus Task Force Press briefing.
In contrast to the subsequent White House press meetings, this brief-
ing occurred earlier, at 3:40 p.m. EST. Note that this meeting was
announced to the public 2.5 h before it took place, hence it must be
considered a pre-scheduled announcement. The country-level fraction
of regularly scheduled announcements is reported in the last column of
Table 1. We run our tests with and without irregularly pre-scheduled
announcements and show that our main results hold in both cases.

More broadly, our dataset comprises an extensive set of purely
COVID-19-related announcements, and it enables researchers to easily
identify each specific announcement. In Table 1, we provide some
interesting dimensions of our data set by detailing the share of an-
nouncements related to reports about Covid cases, live-streamed press
conferences, and announcements by the President or the Prime Minis-
ter.

2.2. Data collection

2.3. Announcements and financial markets

We treat the release of each medical bulletin as an announcement.
The same applies to travel limitations and lockdown policies related
to COVID-19. We note that we have manually tracked these policy
interventions on a daily basis and have constructed a novel dataset
important to study real-time high frequency reactions of financial
markets to epidemic risk.

At the beginning of our sample, we also witnessed important an-
nouncements related to both monetary and fiscal policy interventions.
These announcements are not included in our study and, in addition,
we also run our analysis excluding days with major monetary and fiscal
policy announcements.4 Hence we are confident that our results are not
contaminated by other announcements.

4 As an example, here is an announcement related to a monetary policy

intervention in response to COVID-19:

2020-03-18 23:05:00 CET; FT Breaking News; ECB to launch e750bn
bond-buying programme.

Pre- and post-epidemic samples.
In what follows, we study the financial
dynamics around medical announcement times. In order to isolate
the dynamics related solely to medical announcements, we plot the
differential behavior of our variable of interest with respect to normal
times, i.e., pre-epidemic times. In each country, we define the beginning
of the epidemic period as the day in which the country experienced an
official number of contagion cases greater than or equal to 100. Given
this threshold, China is the first country in our sample to go into the
epidemic phase, whereas New Zealand is last. The appendix shows that
our main results remain unchanged when we start the epidemic sample
for all countries when China reached 100 cases, i.e., at a common date
(see Internet Appendix A).

The pre-epidemic sample starts for all countries on October 1st,
2019, so the pre-epidemic period comprises at least four months of
data. This subsample is long enough to run meaningful comparisons
with the post-pandemic subsample. Consider, for example, an an-
nouncement on a Friday at 3:40 p.m. EST. We compare the reaction
of our financial variables around this announcement to their behavior
at the same time in our pre-epidemic sample.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038504M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Fig. 1. Announcement Time from Twitter. This figure shows a tweet about one of the first COVID-related announcements in the US. The tweet time stamp enables us to identify
the effective timing of the announcement. On the right hand side of this figure, we summarize the topics discussed during the briefing.

Pre- and post-announcement behavior. We run a high-frequency anal-
ysis around announcement times. In what follows, we estimate the
following regression at the minute-level:

in equity valuation as a measure of expected appreciation due to the
reduction of uncertainty on epidemic risk (in our simple model, think
of a reduction of the posterior variance, 𝜎2).6

𝑍𝑡 = (𝑐𝑝𝑟𝑒 + 𝑐𝑡>𝑡∗ ) + (𝛼𝑝𝑟𝑒 + 𝛼𝑡>𝑡∗ ) ⋅ 𝑡 + (𝛽𝑝𝑟𝑒 + 𝛽𝑡>𝑡∗ ) ⋅ 𝑡2,

𝑡 ∈ [𝑡∗ ± 𝐾]

(7)

where 𝑡∗ is the time of the announcement, 𝐾 is equal to 60 min;
and 𝑍𝑡 is the differential behavior of our variable of interest across
the pre- and post-epidemic sample. By doing so, we remove the need
of introducing country and day fixed effects. This specification is a
quadratic function of time that includes dummy variables to account
for post-announcement jumps in both the level (𝑐𝑡>𝑡∗ ) and the slope
(𝛼𝑡>𝑡∗ , 𝛽𝑡>𝑡∗ ). We test the null assumption that there is no difference
post-announcement, 𝐻0 ∶ 𝑐𝑡>𝑡∗ = 𝛼𝑡>𝑡∗ = 𝛽𝑡>𝑡∗ = 0, and if we fail to
reject the null we depict the resulting smooth quadratic fit. Standard
errors are always HAC-adjusted.

Financial data sources. All data are from Thomson Reuters and Bloom-
berg. Equity, bond, and currency data are obtained at the minute
frequency and then aggregated at lower frequencies when necessary.
For each country, we collect data on its major equity index and 10-year
maturity treasury bond index. We measure the risk-free rate by focusing
on the yield of 3-month government bills. Due to data availability, CDS
data are collected at the daily frequency. All details about our data can
be found in table A.3 (see Internet Appendix A).

Equity markets.
In Fig. 2, we show the average cumulative returns
obtained from buying country-specific equities 60 min before a country-
specific announcement and holding them for 120 min. Our results
are averaged across both countries and announcements. Countries are
divided into two groups, AEs and EEs, according to the IMF classifica-
tion.5

The top panels show what happens when considering all countries
and all announcements. Both in AEs and EEs, equity values appreciate
substantially upon the announcement, consistent with our simple model
presented in Section 2.1. This appreciation is persistent, as it remains
almost constant during the next hour in AEs and gets amplified in EEs.
This observation suggests that the release of COVID-19-related news
helps equities. Since we are considering a large number of announce-
ments conveying both positive and negative news, we think of this jump

5 If a country-specific announcement happens when the exchange of the
country is closed, we consider the 60 min prior to the closing time of the
previous day and the first 60 min after the opening of the exchange in the
next day.

One potential concern related to our results is that they may be
driven by a peso problem. In order to address this problem, we do two
things. First, we work with a very large cross section of announcements.
Second, we repeat our analysis by focusing only on announcements
conveying bad news. We measure bad news as an unexpected increase
in the growth rate of contagion cases on the day of the announcement.
We explain in detail our construction of the news in the next section
when we price them using the cross section of equity and bond returns.
In Fig. 2(b), left panel, we show that the same phenomenon is present
to a similar extent when we focus on the subset of announcements
associated with bad news within the group of AEs. Note that the scale
for this panel is one order of magnitude greater than that in Fig. 2(a).
Hence our average results for AEs are not driven by a few extreme
realizations.

We further support this point by replicating our analysis on a
subsample in which we remove days with news in either the top- or
bottom-1% of our distribution (see figure A.1 in the Internet Appendix).
Our results are unchanged (see figure A.2, panel a). In addition, our
results are qualitatively unchanged if we focus on a subsample ending
in December 2020, i.e., at the peak of the second COVID wave (figure
A.2, panel b).

Turning our attention to EEs, we point out that in this case, the
jump is one order of magnitude greater than under the case in which
we consider all announcements. In EEs, it is clear that the average
appreciation that we see in the hour after the announcements is not
driven by the arrival of positive news.7 In general, one could be
concerned that our results are driven by an in-sample predominance of
good news, resulting in more equity appreciations than depreciations
upon announcement. In order to address this concern, we estimate the
average of our news across countries and days. According to standard t -
test, we cannot reject the null assumption that our news are on average
zero. Equivalently, our novel and extensive data set comprises a similar

6 Lucca and Moench (2015) show a slow and persistent accumulation of
positive returns before monetary policy announcements. This drift may be
explained by information leakage. In our case, instead, the sudden increase in
the cumulative returns at the announcement is consistent with no information
leakage.

7 In the first ten minutes after the announcement, negative news on
average dominate the announcement premium. We depict our results for
announcements associated to good news in figure A.2, panel c.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038505M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Fig. 3. Equity Trade Volume around Announcements. The figure shows the average
equity log-volume growth for all countries around announcement times. In the top
panel we depict the difference across pre- and post-epidemic samples. In the bottom
panel we plot the difference in volume growth for the post-epidemic sample between
days when the absolute value of contagion news is above median and days when it
is below median. In each country, the epidemic period starts when there are more
than 100 cases of COVID19. Solid line and shaded areas are based on the estimation
of Eq. (7). Our sample starts on 10/01/2019 and ends on 02/22/2022.

no change before the announcements. Consistent with previous studies
(see, among others, Han, 2020), trade volume increases right after
the announcement. This upward adjustment is more pronounced in
EEs. We interpret these results as strongly supporting the relevance of
information arrival in markets where investors care about the timing of
uncertainty resolution (see, for example, Ai and Bansal, 2018, Ai et al.,
2022a and Ai et al., 2022b).

In addition, these models predict that volume should be more pro-
nounced when the announcements carry stronger news. In theory, this
should apply to both positive and negative news. In order to examine
this prediction, we look at the absolute value of the surprise in the
number of cases across different days. In the bottom panels of Fig. 3, we
show that volume increases relatively more on days with more extreme
(unexpected) cases news. In the next part of this study, we focus on
sovereign bonds and document that liquidity seems to increase in the
bond markets as well.

Bond markets. Fig. 4(a) shows our results for bond returns. The con-
struction of the depicted data is identical to that used for equities. In a
±60-minute window around the announcement, there is no significant
adjustment in bond returns for EEs, consistent with our model in
Section 2.1. In AEs, the adjustment is modest and negative, consistent
with our simple portfolio allocation model if we assume that the supply
curve of bonds is slightly upward sloping.

Through the lens of our model, these results suggest two important
lessons. First, during the COVID-19 crisis, cash-flow uncertainty was
an important determinant of the equity market. This high-frequency
result is consistent with the results documented by Gormsen and Koijen
(2020) looking at dividend futures. Second, given that their cumulative
return is nearly zero across AEs and EEs, bonds are an important hedge
against contagion risk announcements.

According to our model, announcements should prompt a trade
away from bonds. Absent high-frequency data on bonds trading vol-
ume, we test this hypothesis by looking at their bid–ask spread which

Fig. 2. Equity Returns around Announcements. In each panel, dots denote the differ-
ence across subsamples of the cross-country-cross-announcement average cumulative
returns obtained from buying equities 60 min before an announcement and holding
them for 120 min. Panel a (c) comprises announcements from all countries (top-50%
countries in terms of contagion cases) in each group. Panel b excludes announcements
conveying good news. Returns are in log units and multiplied by 100. Solid line and
shaded areas are based on the estimation of Eq. (7). Our sample starts on 10/01/2019
and ends on 02/22/2022.

number of good and bad news across a large cross section of countries
and a long daily time series.

In Fig. 2(c), we consider all of our announcements, but we limit
our attention to countries above the median in total contagion cases.
The scale in these panels is identical to that used in Fig. 2(a). Not
surprisingly, the smaller sample we use produces estimates surrounded
by higher estimation uncertainty. Taking this into account, the value of
the information disclosed during these announcements is higher among
high-COVID AEs and remains almost unchanged among high-COVID
EEs. More broadly, when we look at the entire cross section of our 21
countries, low-COVID countries appear to be less sensitive to contagion-
risk news. This is consistent with the results of the no-arbitrage factor
model that we estimate in the second part of our study.

The equity returns patterns that we document may also be consis-
tent with models featuring behavioral attributes and micro-frictions.
In order to provide more data to distinguish across theories, we also
look at equity trade volume. In Fig. 3, we directly depict the differ-
ence in the log-growth of trade volume across normal and epidemic
subsamples. We find that both in AEs and in EEs trade volume features

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038506M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Table 2
CDS spreads and contagion news. This table reports the results of the following
regression:

𝛥𝑆 𝑖

𝑡 = 𝑑𝑖

0 + 𝑑𝑖

𝑡 ⋅ 𝐷𝑊 𝑒𝑒𝑘

𝑡

+ 𝛽𝑔 ⋅ 𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠𝑡−1 + 𝜖𝑖
𝑡 ,

∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑔

where 𝛥𝑆 𝑖
𝑡 refers to the daily change of the CDS spread in country 𝑖; 𝑔 refers to either
the group of Advanced Economies (AEs) or that of Emerging Economies (EEs); 𝑑𝑖
0 is a
country-level fixed effect and 𝐷𝑊 𝑒𝑒𝑘
is a weekly time fixed effect. ‘Contagion cases -
news’ refers to the innovation in the growth of the global number of contagion cases
as measured in Section 3. ‘Adj. R2 w/o’ refers to the adjusted R squared from the same
regression in which we omit the contagion news. Standard Errors are clustered at the
country-level. Our sample starts on 02/01/2020 and ends on 02/22/2022.

𝑡

Contagion cases - news

Adj. R2
Adj. R2 w/o
Country FE
Week FE

A.E.

6.133∗∗∗
(1.988)
0.02%
0.02%
Yes
No

7.735∗∗
(3.782)
4.64%
4.64%
Yes
Yes

E.E.

27.897∗∗∗
(8.298)
0.20%
0.20%
Yes
No

27.290∗∗∗
(8.364)
14.24%
14.24%
Yes
Yes

Post-epidemic dynamics.
In our analysis, we plot the differential be-
havior of equity markets around announcement times across our pre-
and post-epidemic samples. We also report our results for equities in
the post-epidemic sample (see figure A.4) and confirm that medical
announcements, on average, are associated with an appreciation of
equities. In addition, our model suggests that the realized jump in
cumulative returns should decrease with bad news, i.e., it should be low
(high) when the number of cases announced is above (below) expecta-
tions. In figure A.5 in the Internet Appendix, we depict the difference
in cumulative returns across days in which countries experienced an
unexpectedly high number of cases (bad news) and days in which
they experienced an unexpectedly low number of cases (good news).
The model suggests that this difference should be negative around the
announcement time, and our figure confirms this result.

The role of domestic announcements. Recall that our cross section com-
prises 21 countries. We can think about the previous results about
equity (bond) returns as the equal-weighted cumulative returns that an
investor could obtain by trading ahead of each announcement across 21
sources of announcements (one per country) and in 21 equity (bond)
markets, for a total of 21 × 21 possible trade combinations.

In order to disentangle the effects of local announcements on local
markets, we also consider the average cumulative return of an investor
that trades only in the domestic market ahead of domestic announce-
ments. In figure A.6, we focus on the average cumulative returns across
21 trade strategies that involve neither foreign news nor foreign assets.
Our data confirm that bonds have a muted response to announcements,
whereas equities appreciate afterward.

Covid vs. macroeconomic announcements.
In order to further isolate the
role of medical announcements, we have created a dataset comprising
the dates on which either inflation, industrial production, or GDP data
are released in each country in our cross section. Our results continue to
hold when we exclude these days from our dataset (see, for example,
figure A.7). In other words, our announcement results are unrelated
to other announcements already explored in the literature in terms
of content (we focus on medical announcements) and timing (our
results also hold on days when there are no major macroeconomic
announcements).

Regularly pre-scheduled announcements. At high frequency, all of the
announcements that we have utilized so far are pre-scheduled. This
means that investors are aware that an announcement is going to be
made within a few hours. Still, some of our announcements are not
regularly scheduled, in contrast to macroeconomic announcements. In
order to be consistent with previous studies, for each country, we
identify regularly scheduled announcements by ensuring that (i) they
are about case reports or live-streamed events and (ii) they are released

In the top panels, dots denote
Fig. 4. Sovereign Bonds around Announcements.
the difference across subsamples of
the cross-country-cross-announcement average
cumulative returns obtained from buying 10-year sovereign bonds 60 min before an
announcement and holding them for 120 min. In the bottom panels, dots refer to the
difference across subsamples of the cross-country-cross-announcement average of the
bid–ask spread of the bonds. Returns are in log units. All series are multiplied by 100.
Solid line and shaded areas are based on the estimation of Eq. (7). Our sample starts
on 10/01/2019 and ends on 02/22/2022.

we interpret as a measure of inaction in the market. On average, after
an announcement, there is an immediate decline in the bid–ask spread
in AEs and a delayed one in EEs. This is consistent with the idea that
covid announcements have been an important source of trade.

An alternative explanation for the muted response of bonds is
that they are subject to two offsetting forces. Specifically, flight to
safety may promote bond appreciation, but sovereign default risk may
increase and push bond prices downward simultaneously. In order to
study the plausibility of this hypothesis, we collect daily country-level
data on CDS spreads and link their daily variation to the daily news on
contagion cases. We explain in detail how we measure news in the next
section. Since different countries entered this crisis with different levels
of fiscal capacity, exploring country-level heterogeneity is essential. For
this reason, in our empirical analysis, we include both country-level
fixed effects and week-level time fixed effects.

In Table 2, we show that adverse contagion news tends to increase
CDS spreads in a statistically significant way. This effect is three times
stronger in EEs. Simultaneously, we document that this news produces
a very modest increase in the adjusted R-squared of our regression,
implying that for AEs, default concerns have been a second-order issue.

2.4. Additional results

This section summarizes a list of additional results reported in detail
in Internet Appendix A. Since our benchmark analysis is based on
several methodological choices, we show the role played by each of
them in what follows. More broadly, we show that our results are robust
to several methodological changes.

The role of country-specific epidemic dates.
In our benchmark analysis,
we have country-specific dates defining the beginning of the pandemic.
As an alternative, we can pick a common date, namely the day on which
China reported 100 official cases. Our results are unchanged when we
adopt this strategy. As an example, see our results for equity in figure
A.3.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038507M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

at a recurrent country-specific time of the day. Our results also hold if
we focus on regularly pre-scheduled announcements (see figure A.8).
In addition, when focusing on regularly pre-scheduled announcements,
our sample excludes almost entirely observations from the first six
weeks of pandemic diffusion. Therefore, our results are not driven by
early announcements of expansionary fiscal and monetary interven-
tions or those discussing the spread of the pandemic in early-affected
foreign countries like China and Italy. This subset of announcements
primarily centers on the domestic number of cases.

Information diffusion. Our novel social media-based data set enables us
to measure the diffusion of information at a very high frequency. For
each announcement in our data set, we compile all COVID-19-related
tweets issued in a ±60-minute window around announcement time by
major newspapers in each country. In the next section, we provide a
detailed description of our data collection procedure. For the sake of
statistical power, we aggregate all of these tweets across all of our
countries and call the resulting aggregate ‘World’.

In the left panel of figure A.9, we show the per-country per-minute
average cumulative number of tweets around announcement times
during the post-epidemic sample. The right panel refers to retweets,
that is, our measure of attention to the news. Both information diffusion
and attention to the news increase significantly in the hour after
announcements. In order to interpret the magnitude of the diffusion,
we must clarify that we collect only tweets from major newspapers and
their respective number of retweets. Because of API limitations, it is
impossible for to us measure how many users read an individual tweet.
Hence our figures represent a lower bound on the overall diffusion.

In addition, it is evident that most of the twitting activity takes place
in the time window [−90 −30] (‘preview’ tweets about the announce-
ment) and [0 +90] (‘rehash’ tweets). These results are reassuring as
they provide additional support to our covid-related data set, as the
time of our announcements nicely aligns with that of the news media
cycle.

3. Contagion news

In this section, we attempt to price news about pandemic risk. We
do it using two fundamental measures, namely, unexpected changes in
the number of contagion cases and unexpected changes in the tone of
the news about contagion. The first measure is based on an objective
count of COVID-19 positive cases. Nevertheless, across different months
or contagion waves, the same variation in the number of cases may be
associated with different assessments of risk. For this reason, we find it
necessary also to study a media-based measure of news tone.

Our analysis confirms that global epidemic news has a significant
market price of risk. In April 2020, at the peak of the first COVID
contagion wave in AE, daily equity risk premia may have increased by
28% in AEs and by 13% in EEs compared to the median risk premia in
our sample. This disruption is comparable to that measured during the
global financial crisis.8

3.1. Data collection

Twitter-based news.
In the spirit of Baker et al. (2016), we identify
major newspapers for a large cross section of countries (see table A.1
in the Internet Appendix). In contrast to Baker et al. (2016), we do not
analyze articles; rather, we track news published on Twitter in real-
time to produce high-frequency data when needed. More specifically,
we track the news related to the COVID-19 pandemic posted by major
newspapers on Twitter. We do so by searching for keywords such
as ‘coronavirus’ and ‘covid19’. For each newspaper, we identify its
headquarters location so we can determine its specific time zone.

8 These numbers are annualized according to the number of annual trading

days and are net of the median risk premium in our full sample.

In Table 3, we report a summary of our social media-based dataset.
It is very comprehensive and it features several dimensions that enable
us to study both information production and diffusion. Specifically, our
ability to track retweets and likes gives us a high-frequency measure
of attention. Google searches are often used to measure attention
(Da et al., 2011; Ramelli and Wagner, 2020), but to the best of our
knowledge, they are not provided minute-by-minute, and they do not
account for the timing of initial production of the news, an aspect that
is very important when analyzing capital market reactions.

The time series behavior of our news indicator is depicted in Fig. 5.
For each country, we also depict the beginning of the epidemic period,
which we identify as the day the number of confirmed cases of COVID-
19 exceeds 100. We note several interesting patterns. First, there is
significant heterogeneity across countries in the timing of information
diffusion. Across several countries, information diffusion becomes more
intense after the beginning of the local epidemic period. We note that
both the diffusion of news, that is, the number of tweets, and the
attention to the news, that is, the number of retweets, increase rapidly
after the beginning of the local epidemic period.

Fig. 6 shows both diffusion and attention to the news at the global
level, that is, when we aggregate all of our tweets and retweets across
countries. In Fig. 6(a), the right panel of this figure provides a break-
down of the most prominent topics addressed in the COVID-19 tweets,
namely, vaccines, death risk, quarantine measures, and availability of
medical supplies. The attention to all of them increased substantially,
with vaccines becoming prominent in the fall of 2020. In Fig. 6(b), we
document similar results for high-attention tweets, i.e., tweets ranked
top-1% by the number of retweets within each one of our countries.
For this subset of tweets, we also collected their retweets with a
‘quote’, i.e., with text written by the ‘‘retweeters’’ in order to study
their tone. We find a high correlation between the tone of the original
newspaper tweets and that of the quoted retweets, meaning that our
methodology captures a relevant-and-consistent partition of tweets. We
provide detailed results in the Internet Appendix (see table B.1).

Fig. 7 shows the intraday pattern of the diffusion of COVID-19 news
for each country. This figure is not based on universal time, rather
it accounts for country-specific time. In each country, we consider
two country-specific subsamples: the pre-epidemic period and the first
wave of the epidemic. The first wave spans from the time a country
records its 100th COVID-19 case to the peak of global daily deaths,
on 01/18/2021. The pre-epidemic sample starts on 01/01/2020 and
it ends on the time a country records its 100th COVID-19 case. There
are two main takeaways from this picture: (i) the diffusion of COVID-
19-related news increases significantly with local epidemic conditions,
and (ii) a significant share of the diffusion occurs while the local
capital markets are open. Hence monitoring media activity can be a
valuable tool for tracking the real-time information set of financial
market participants.

Tweet tone. Since we use Twitter activity to form a high-frequency risk
factor, we need to identify the tone of the tweets, that is, we need
to know whether they relate to either good or bad news. Given (i)
the high volume of tweets that we collect and (ii) the fact that our
tweets are written in different languages, we use Polyglot (available
at https://pypi.org/project/polyglot/), i.e., a natural language pipeline
that supports multilingual applications with polarity lexicons for 136
languages. This computer-based mapping algorithm reads our text and
classifies the words into three degrees of polarity: +1 for positive
words, −1 for negative words, and 0 for neutral words. We provide
two examples in table A.2 (see our Internet Appendix).

Our measure of the tone of tweets is based on the count of positive
words minus the count of negative words, divided by the sum of posi-
tive and negative word counts (Twedt and Rees, 2012). We compute
this measure at the country level at both the hourly and the daily
frequency, focusing solely on initial tweets and excluding any retweets.
We then aggregate this measure across countries to obtain a global
measure.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038508M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Table 3
Newspapers dataset. This table shows summary statistics of COVID19-related news data that we collect for a large cross section of countries. Our
real-time data range from 01/01/2020 to 02/22/2022. For each country, we report number of news providers and number of tweets collected.
We also report the total number of retweets and likes as measures of attention. The last four columns report the share of tweets mentioning
number of deaths, quarantine measures, medical supply, and vaccines, respectively.

Country

No. news

Tweets

Retweets

Likes

Topics

providers

Mortality

Quarant.

Med. supply

Vaccines

Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
France
Germany
Hong Kong
India
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
New Zealand
Spain
Switzerland
UK
USA

Total

4
4
4
5
4
3
4
4
4
3
4
3
4
4
4
3
4
4
4
11

84

77,338
17,641
32,552
48,545
33,954
32,791
32,877
47,059
12,213
21,204
103,907
33,696
18,984
13,459
79,244
9,520
38,865
8,390
25,356
116,365

1,205,269
144,685
1,331,641
442,675
408,095
947,706
474,795
1,424,717
147,977
419,964
937,468
265,658
156,845
82,445
1,625,687
45,474
2,668,188
37,173
1,145,404
7,264,225

3,154,158
348,074
8,705,983
861,102
630,825
2,580,177
1,450,808
2,384,879
331,434
606,520
5,611,874
715,064
277,461
143,649
4,262,382
169,920
4,792,047
47,191
2,286,491
17,259,747

803,960

21,176,091

56,619,786

13%
19%
45%
33%
56%
39%
17%
25%
20%
17%
32%
10%
18%
44%
14%
10%
30%
22%
27%
29%

26%

10%
39%
8%
10%
6%
14%
12%
26%
24%
32%
23%
32%
13%
10%
11%
40%
20%
20%
30%
7%

19%

14%
12%
15%
17%
10%
19%
25%
27%
20%
21%
16%
29%
30%
26%
25%
15%
14%
25%
15%
23%

20%

63%
29%
32%
40%
28%
28%
45%
22%
35%
31%
29%
28%
39%
20%
50%
35%
36%
33%
29%
41%

35%

We depict our global tone factor in Fig. 8, left panel. Its time pattern
is consistent with the observed contagion dynamics. Specifically, the
tone became very negative by the end of January as the conditions in
China started to precipitate. It improved in early February when there
was still no sign of massive contagion in Europe, and it declined again
when the epidemic started in Italy. The slow improvement of the tone
of our tweets observed after the beginning of March pairs well with the
observed flattening of the contagion curves in many of the countries
in our dataset. We find these results reassuring as they confirm that
our text analysis algorithm tracks the contagion dynamics in a reliable
manner.

In addition, we note that collecting all original tweets and their
retweets is computationally impossible for us. In table B.1 (see In-
ternet Appendix B), we show that there is a positive and significant
correlation between the tone of the original tweets and that of the
top-1% quote (re)tweets, meaning that our methodology captures a
relevant-and-consistent partition of tweets.

For the sake of our asset pricing analysis, we focus on the inno-
vations to the tone of our tweets. One simple way to extract these
innovations is to consider the difference in the tone at day 𝑡 and its 5-
day backward-looking moving average assessed at time 𝑡 − 1. We depict
this time series in the right panel of Fig. 8 and note that it is nearly
serially uncorrelated.

Cases and financial data. Cases data are from official medical bulletins.
Our primary source is CSSE at Johns Hopkins University.9 News to the
contagion factor is obtained by computing the difference between the
daily growth rate of contagion cases at time 𝑡 and its backward-looking
time 𝑡 − 1 moving average computed over the previous 5 days. We
choose a 5-day window because it matches the number of days of a
typical trading week.

Since our contagion-based factor spans a 7-day week, we assign
to Friday the average growth rate of global contagion cases that oc-
curred on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday.10 Our financial data sources
are detailed in table A.3 (see Internet Appendix A). Our empirical

asset pricing analysis takes into consideration the hypothesis that our
countries may feature heterogeneous exposure to global contagion risk.

Cases as a driver of time-varying exposure. One additional reason to
focus on the number of cases as a relevant determinant of risk-premia
is that many tweets in our sample focus on this topic. Specifically,
we apply the Sievert and Shirley (2014) Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) topic model to our covid-related tweets from English-written
newspapers. Tweets are preprocessed, i.e., we remove stopwords and
symbols such as #, we ‘stem’ our words, and account for both unigrams
and bigrams. We apply the unsupervised machine learning model to
our data at the country-level.11 When 𝜆 is set to the canonical value of
0.5, in most of our English-speaking countries, the top unigrams and
bigrams from the main topics include ‘covid cases’ or related terms.
We report an example in figure B.1 (see Internet Appendix B). Our data
visualization webpage lets the interested reader choose different values
of 𝜆.

3.2. The market price of viral contagion news

Daily news. Every day, we group countries into three portfolios accord-
ing to their relative number of COVID-19 cases measured the previous
day. We do this separately for AEs and EEs. In Internet Appendix B, we
demonstrate that these results remain robust even when the share of
COVID-19 cases is weighted by population (table B.2), indicating that
our results are not driven by countries with larger populations. The H
(L) portfolio comprises the top (bottom) countries in terms of COVID-19
cases. We also consider an investment strategy long in the H portfolio
and short in the L portfolio. We refer to the returns of this portfolio as
𝐻𝑀𝐿-COVID19.

We report common summary statistics for these portfolios in Ta-
ble 4. The turnover in each portfolio is moderate. The in-sample
average of the returns in all portfolios is not different from zero, which
is not surprising given our short sample, which comprises multiple

9 https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID19/tree/master/csse_covid_

19_data/csse_covid_19_time_series

10 For the Easter Holiday, we assign to Thursday the average daily growth

rate of global cases from Thursday to the following Monday.

11 Topics are indexed by 𝑘 = 1, … , 5. 𝜆 determines the weight given to the
probability of term 𝑤 under topic 𝑘 relative to its lift (measuring both on the
log scale). Setting 𝜆 = 1 results in the familiar ranking of terms in decreasing
order of their topic-specific probability, and setting 𝜆 = 0 ranks terms solely
by their lift.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)1038509M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Fig. 5. Information Diffusion and Attention across Countries. This figure shows the daily number of tweets posted in each country by major newspapers. The vertical axis shows
the daily number of tweets. The size of each data point represents the number of retweets scaled by the maximum daily number of retweets for each country. The sample starts
on 01/01/2020 and ends on 02/22/2022. The vertical line depicts the date that each country had more than 100 confirmed cases of COVID19. More details on the data collection
are reported in the Internet Appendix.

contagion waves with natural peaks and valleys. All portfolio returns
have substantial volatility and negative skewness. Focusing on the first
quartile of the distribution of returns, we see that the portfolio com-
prising the more exposed countries tends to have more severe negative
downside risk. This is an aspect that we capture in our conditional
no-arbitrage model.

Model and estimation. Given these preliminary observations, we con-
sider the following conditional asset pricing model,
𝑓 ,𝑡+1 = 𝑟𝑒𝑥
𝑟𝑒𝑥
𝛽𝑓 ,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝑓 ,1𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡,

𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝛽𝑓 ,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏

𝑓 ∈ {𝐻, 𝑀, 𝐿},

(9)

(8)

𝑡+1

,

𝜕𝑟𝑒𝑥
𝑓 ,𝑡
𝜕𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡

= 𝜆𝛽𝑓 ,1,

(10)

where 𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡 is the share of contagion cases associated to portfolio 𝑓 at
time 𝑡, and 𝜆 is the market price of risk (MPR) of the global news factor
𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏
𝑡+1 .
This model can potentially capture many of the features of returns
seen so far. First, it captures predictability through contagion-based
time-varying betas. Second, it has the potential to capture higher
negative skewness for countries that go through more severe contagion
paths. Consider the case of portfolio H comprising countries receiving
a sequence of relatively more severe adverse contagion news. This

portfolio will have severe exposure to adverse news as the relative
contagion share of the portfolio grows. When the relative contagion
share starts to flatten out and decline, the sensitivity of this portfolio to
good news is reduced (|𝛽𝐻,𝑡| shrinks). This means that returns become
less sensitive to positive news, and hence the right tail of the returns
distribution is shortened.

Third, consistent with our previous descriptive returns, it accounts
for heterogeneous exposure to global contagion news. Last but not least,
it enables us to identify the market price of risk of this global contagion
component, 𝜆. By no-arbitrage, the extent of time-series predictability
of our excess returns must equal 𝜆𝛽𝑓 ,1, and 𝛽𝑓 ,1 can be easily estimated
in the time-series by considering the multiplicative factor 𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡 ⋅𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏
𝑡+1 .
We report our main results obtained from daily data in Table 5.
The first two columns are based on unexpected changes in the growth
of global contagion cases. The right-most columns are based on unex-
pected changes in the global tone of tweets. Note that the countries we
consider provide daily updates about contagion cases at the end of the
day. In order to properly represent the information set of investors, in
our asset pricing model we lag the news by one day, i.e., we assume
that day-𝑡 returns respond to news released in the evening of day 𝑡 − 1.

We estimate our asset pricing model through GMM and notice
that all portfolios have an untabulated significant exposure to our

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385010M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Fig. 6. Global Information Diffusion. In panel a, the left panel of this figure shows the daily total number of tweets posted across countries by major newspapers. The vertical
axis shows the daily number of tweets. The size of each data point represents the number of retweets scaled by the maximum daily number of retweets. The right panel shows
the daily number of tweets related to death-risk, (scarcity of) medical supplies, quarantine, and vaccines. The tweets were identified using a multilingual bag-of-words approach.
In panel b, we focus on high-attention tweets, i.e., top-1% by number of quote (re)tweets. The sample starts on 01/01/2020 and ends on 02/22/2022. More details on the data
collection are reported in the Internet Appendix.

Table 4
Summary statistics for portfolios. This table shows summary statistics for the equity
excess returns of portfolios formed on a daily basis according to the relative share
of country-specific COVID19 cases measured the day before formation. Hourly excess
returns are in log units and multiplied by 100. Portfolios are obtained from equity
indexes. Our real-time data range from 02/01/2020 to 02/22/2022. Turnover measures
the number of countries entering or exiting a portfolio relative to the total number of
countries in a specific portfolio × number of days in our sample. Numbers in parenthesis
are HAC-adjusted standard errors.

Low

Medium

High

HML𝐶𝑂𝑉 𝐼𝐷19

Panel A: Advanced economies
Mean

0.014
(0.060)
1.159
−1.222
−0.471
5
0.5

StDev
Skewness
First Quartile
Avg. N. Countries
Turnover (%)
Panel B: Emerging economies
0.009
Mean
(0.087)
1.69
−2.106
−0.662
3
0.4

StDev
Skewness
First Quartile
Avg. N. Countries
Turnover (%)

0.039
(0.060)
1.331
−0.762
−0.496
4
1.3

0.044
(0.094)
1.855
−1.255
−0.862
2
0.8

0.020
(0.072)
1.433
−1.648
−0.497
5
0.6

0.096∗∗
(0.049)
1.75
−0.752
−0.774
2
0.5

0.006
(0.031)
1.044
−0.108
−0.545
–
–

0.086
(0.063)
1.605
0.316
−0.942
–
–

Table 5
Summary of MPR estimation. This table shows the results of the conditional linear factor
model described in Eqs. (8)–(10). Portfolios are formed on a daily basis according to
the relative share of country-specific COVID19 cases measured the day before formation
(𝑋𝑡). On the left (right), the COVID19 factor is measured as the news to global COVID
cases growth (tone of COVID-related tweets). When we measure the COVID19 news as
unexpected number of contagion cases (unexpected improvement in COVID19-related
tweets), we expect a negative (positive) market price of risk (𝑀𝑃 𝑅). Both daily excess
returns and market prices of risk are in log units. Our cross section of test assets
comprises both equity and bond portfolios. Our real-time data range from 02/01/2020
to 02/22/2022. Estimates and HAC-adjusted standard errors are obtained through GMM.

Covid cases

Twitter news

A.E.

E.E.

A.E.

E.E.

−0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)

Local units
coef
se
USD units
coef
se
Controlling for MKT
coef
se

−0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

−0.002∗∗∗
(0.001)

−0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

−0.005∗∗∗
(0.002)

−0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.008∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385011M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Fig. 7. Intraday Information Diffusion. This figure shows the intra-day trend of the number of tweets posted every 30 min across several countries in our dataset. The dotted
line depicts the trend during the first wave of the epidemic, while the dashed line shows the pre-epidemic trend. The first wave spans from the time a country records its 100th
COVID-19 case to the peak of global daily deaths, on 01/18/2021. The pre-epidemic sample starts on 01/01/2020 and it ends on the time a country records its 100th COVID-19
case. The time reflects the local time zone of each newspaper. More details on the data collection are reported in the Internet Appendix.

of contagion cases is a relevant positive predictor of the future cost of
capital.

Our results hold regardless of whether we run our model using
local currency returns or returns in USD. Furthermore, our results
remain significant when we estimate a two-factor version of our model
which controls for global market risk as measured by the MSCI Global
Index.13 Looking at the output of our specifications and accounting for
estimation uncertainty, we conclude that 0.3% is a reasonable lower
bound on the daily market price of risk of daily contagion news.
We consider this estimate very significant, consistent with the great
contraction experienced in equity markets during the first wave of the
epidemic period.

Simultaneously, we note that this value is very plausible once we
account for two observations. First, this is not the MPR of a financial
factor and the associated estimated betas are very small. Second, con-
tagion risk follows waves with a relatively short half-life. Equivalently,
the exposure of our assets to this risk is small and relatively quick in
reverting to zero.

Real-time estimation results. We visualize our results in Fig. 9. In con-
trast to what has been done so far, we estimate our model sequentially
on samples of increasing length. Specifically, we start by estimating our
model on a sample ending in June 2020, and then we re-estimate it by
adding two weeks of data at the time. The very last estimation iteration
delivers results identical to those reported in Table 5. This exercise
clarifies to which extent investors can identify exposures to contagion
risk in real-time with our methodology.

In Fig. 9(c), we show that our estimates of the MPR are statisti-
cally significant in almost the entire sample for both AEs and EEs.
Since the figures are based on Covid cases, the MPR is negative. In
Figs. 9(a) and 9(b), we show the estimated risk premium on an HML-
COVID19 strategy on either bond or equity portfolios across AEs and

13 Throughout our study when considering the MSCI index to control for the

market, we use returns in USD. For EEs (EAs), we use the EE (EAs) MSCI.

Fig. 8. Twitter-Based COVID19 Factor. This figure shows our daily global Twitter-based
COVID19 factor. We use Polygot to measure the polarity of our tweets and compute
the tone of each tweet according to Twedt and Rees (2012). We aggregate the tones at
a daily frequency and across countries. MA refers to a backward looking 5-day moving
average. The news at time 𝑡 is computed as the difference between the tweets-tone
at time 𝑡 and their MA at time 𝑡 − 1. The sample starts on 01/01/2020 and ends on
02/22/2022.

contagion-based news, 𝛽𝑓 ,𝑡.12 In our sample, the portfolio of countries
with the highest share of COVID-19 cases tends to be more exposed
to contagion news. This sign is consistent with our expectations since
positive (negative) news about global contagion growth (tone of tweets)
refers to an adverse shock to equity returns. Most importantly, the
implied daily market price of risk is negative (positive) and significant
with respect to contagion (tone of tweets) news. This means that the
relative share of contagion cases forecasts an increase in expected
future returns across all portfolios (𝜆𝛽𝑓 ,1 > 0). Equivalently, the share

12 The share of contagion cases across our three portfolios have very differ-
ent scales and variability. As a result, the coefficients 𝛽𝑓 ,1 are not revealing of
the sorting of 𝛽𝑓 ,𝑡 across portfolios. For this reason, we report only estimated
MPRs.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385012M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Fig. 9. Sequentially Estimated MPRs and Risk Premia. The top panels refer to the HML-COVID strategy in AEs (EEs) estimated sequentially on samples of increasing size. The first
sample ends in June 2020, we then add 2 weeks of data at the time. The bottom panels show the market price of risk of covid cases from the same sequence of estimations. ‘fx’
(‘raw’) refers to returns expressed in USD (local currency). Shaded area show 90% confidence intervals.

EEs. An HML-COVID19 strategy on bonds delivers a zero (negative)
risk premium in AEs (EEs). Equities, instead, deliver a positive risk
premium both in AEs and EEs. The estimated premium is smaller but
better identified in AEs than in EEs. This result is important because it
implies that containment policies that keep contagion cases relatively
low may be very valuable in terms of saving lives and preventing severe
financial wealth losses. The companion estimates of the exposure of
these strategies can be found in figure B.2, Internet Appendix B.

Additional results with daily data.
In table B.3 (see Internet Appendix
B), we show that replacing covid-related news with market returns in
our conditional model delivers no positive and statistically significant
market price of risk. This result confirms that (i) a conditional CAPM
model fails in capturing viral contagion risk, and (ii) our measures are
informative about viral risk.

K. French provides the FF5 factors at a daily frequency for de-
veloped countries (Fama and French, 2017). Given our limited cross
section, estimating our model with time-varying betas for both our
covid factor and the FF3/FF5 factors is not feasible. We take a hybrid
approach and estimate a model in which the betas of our covid factor
are time-varying, whereas the betas of the additional FF3/FF5 factors
are constant. We report our estimated MPRs in table B.4 and confirm
our main results.

So far, we have estimated a model with heterogeneous and time-
varying exposure to a common risk factor related to global contagion
news. Our dataset also enables us to construct AE- and EE-specific
measures of COVID-19 case growth and Twitter tone. See, for example,
figure B.3 in the Internet Appendix.

We identify purely AE- and EE-specific components by regressing
these fundamental measures on their global counterpart. The residuals
of these two separate regressions represent AE- and EE-specific news for
us. We show mixed results in Internet Appendix B, table B.5. Specifi-
cally, when we use only equity-based test assets, local contagion news
(panel A) is priced negatively in AEs and positively in EEs. Twitter-
based local news (panel B) has a market price of risk statistically

not different from zero. Local news is priced only when we use both
bond and equity indices as test assets.14 Given these considerations,
we consider our specification with heterogeneous and time-varying
exposure to global contagion risk news as more robust.

Controlling for jumps. Baker et al. (2020) point out that the COVID-
19 epidemic period is characterized by a high frequency of extreme
realizations of the US equity market returns. In order to check whether
jump risk is driving our results, we repeat our analysis by using returns
orthogonalized with respect to measures of jump risk. Specifically, we
regress the equity returns of each one of the countries in our sample
(indexed by 𝑖) on a country-specific daily dummy variable equal to
𝚜𝚒𝚐𝚗 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 when 𝚊𝚋𝚜 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 > 2.5%.

Since we work with a broad cross section of countries which in-
cludes also EEs, we consider an additional relative definition of jump
risk. Namely, we construct a daily country-specific dummy variable
equal to 𝚜𝚒𝚐𝚗 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 when 𝚊𝚋𝚜 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 is above the 99th percentile of its
pre-epidemic country-specific distribution. We report our country-level
percentiles in the Internet Appendix (table B.6).

In Table 6, we show our estimates of the market price of risk after
controlling for realized jumps. Our main results continue to hold. In
addition, we also consider a specification in which we orthogonalize
our global factors with respect to a dummy variable that takes value
𝚜𝚒𝚐𝚗 𝑀𝑆𝐶𝐼𝑡 when the return of the MSCI global index is greater
(smaller) than 2.5% (−2.5%). Our results confirm that pandemic risk
carries a relevant market price.

Industry-level results.
In order to further exploit our rich framework,
we consider a more granular cross section by looking at industry-
level equity indices in Europe. This task is relevant for at least two

14 By ‘‘local news’’ we mean a variation in tone that is not spanned by
a common global component. The content of the news may refer to either
domestic or foreign events.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385013M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Table 6
MPR estimation - controlling for jump risk. This table shows the estimates of the MPR for Twitter news controlling for jump risk. We pre-clean excess
returns/factors by orthogonalize them with respect to an indicator variable equal to 1 when markets experienced a ‘‘jump’’. Except for this preliminary
step, the portfolio formation, sample selection, and estimation procedure are the same as in Table 5. In column (1) we orthogonalize the excess returns
of our test assets with respect to a country-level daily dummy variable that takes the value 𝚜𝚒𝚐𝚗 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 if 𝚊𝚋𝚜 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 > 2.5%. In column (2), we repeat the
same procedure but the dummy variable is equal to 𝚜𝚒𝚐𝚗 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 if 𝚊𝚋𝚜 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 is above the 99th percentile of its pre-epidemic country-specific distribution.
In columns (1b) and (2b), we also orthogonalize our global risk factors using a global dummy variable that takes value 𝚜𝚒𝚐𝚗 𝑀𝑆𝐶𝐼𝑡 when the return
of the MSCI global index is greater (smaller) than 2.5% (−2.5%).

(1)

(2)

(1b)

A.E.

E.E.

A.E.

E.E.

A.E.

E.E.

A.E.

(2b)

E.E.

0.014∗∗∗
(0.002)

Local units
coef
se
USD units
0.017∗∗
coef
se
(0.007)
Controlling for MKT
0.012∗∗∗
coef
(0.002)
se

0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.012∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.015∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.011∗∗
(0.005)

0.012∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.013∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.007
(0.005)

0.007∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.002∗∗
(0.001)

0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)

reasons: (i) industries are well known to be difficult to price; and (ii)
our industries comprise firms based in different countries and hence
their riskiness is based on an interesting mix of country-level contagion
conditions.

Specifically, we utilize daily firm-level data for the entirety of the
STOXX Europe 600, extracted from Bloomberg. The STOXX Europe
600 is a comprehensive index encompassing 600 constituents that span
large, mid, and small capitalization companies across 17 European
nations; we account for the quarterly compositional changes of the
index. This selection represents nearly 90% of the free-float market
capitalization in the European stock market. For our analysis, we only
focus on firms headquartered in one of the European countries in our
sample (CH, DE, ES, FR, IT, SE, UK). We aggregate their equity returns
at the industry level using the 2-digit Global Industry Classification
Standard (GICS) code and obtain 11 distinct portfolios whose compo-
sition is detailed in table B.7. As shown in Table 7, the market prices
of risk estimated in our cross section of industries are comparable to
those reported in Table 5. This result supports our methodology as it
shows that it can deliver significant results even at the industry-level,
not just when pricing managed portfolio with country-level returns.
In addition, in panel B and C we show the average exposure of each
industry to our covid factors. Industries are ranked according to their
average betas. We note two important points. First, the ranking of our
industries when we define news as unexpected covid case growth is
the perfect mirror image of the ranking when we use innovations to
the tone of our Twitter news. Equivalently, once we account the fact
that the MPRs have opposite signs, the ranking is the same. We find
this result reassuring.

Our estimation confirms that Energy, Utilities and Consumption Dis-
cretionary have been the most exposed to covid risk.15 Health, Materials
and IT, instead, have been relatively safer. This cross sectional average
ranking is preserved in the time series through our sample.

Intra-day news. An important advantage of our Twitter-based risk-
factor is that we can measure it at very high frequencies, in contrast to
daily contagion cases. Using higher frequency data may help sharpen
the estimate of the market price of risk because it provides an increased
number of observations.

This section focuses only on European countries whose markets are
open simultaneously. Specifically, we focus on CH, DE, ES, FR, IT, SE
and UK. Every day, we group them into three portfolios according to
their relative number of COVID-19 cases. In Table 8, we show our
estimation results when we link hourly equity and bond excess returns
to hourly Twitter-based news.

15 Consumption discretionary comprises segments that have been seriously
armed during the pandemic such as Automobiles, Hotels, Restaurants and
Leisure. A minority of segments, instead, have grown (for example, households
durables and homefurnishing Retail)

As for daily data, we consider multiple specifications of our no-
arbitrage model. In this case, we also report our estimated beta coef-
ficients. The implied market price of risk is positive, well-identified,
and sizable. Our implied betas continue to be positive, i.e., viral con-
tagion is priced as a source of risk. Consistent with the failure of the
international-CAPM documented in table B.3, our the implied market
price of risk is still positive and sizable when we control for the market
and use a broader cross section of test assets.

There may be several country-specific characteristics (e.g., fiscal
conditions, competition, etc.) that could make our portfolios differently
exposed to pandemic risk—in order to address this concern, we replace
𝛽0 in Eq. (9) with 𝛽𝑓
0 , i.e., a country-specific fixed effect to its exposure.
Thanks to the hourly frequency, we have enough observations to esti-
mate this richer model. Our results continue to hold and are reported
in table B.8.

Controlling for volatility.
In this last step of our research, we project our
Twitter-based COVID factor on realized market volatility and use the
implied residual to redo our analysis. Equivalently, we look at COVID
news that are orthogonal to pure volatility shocks. We measure realized
volatility as the standard deviation of the MSCI Global Index at the
daily (hourly) frequency using minute-level data. We report our results
in Table 9. Both daily data and intra-day data confirm that contagion
news has an extremely high MPR, even after controlling for volatility.

International flows. To further validate our results, we study interna-
tional investment flows related to the countries in our cross section.
Weekly net flows are from EPFR and they are rescaled by country-
level GDP so that our results are not driven by country size. In this
step, we exclude the US, given its unique role in international markets
(among others, see Maggiori, 2017). Over such a long span of time,
capital flows toward/from the US were driven by many other factors
above and beyond COVID. After forming portfolios according to relative
contagion levels, we forecast one-week ahead flows using the (lagged)
weekly share of portfolio-level COVID-19 cases.

As reported in Table 10, countries that start the week with a higher
level of relative contagion are expected to receive lower net inflows
(𝛽1 < 0). This effect is reversed (𝛽1 > 0) when we focus on net bond
flows in EE, consistent with the idea that they may be perceived as safer
assets and hence their demand may actually increase due to flight to
safety.16 We visualize these findings in figure B.4, Internet Appendix B.

4. Conclusion

In this study, we quantify the exposure of major financial markets
to news shocks about global contagion risk, taking into account local

16 Recall that in EEs, bonds provide insurance against bad covid news (see

Fig. 9(b)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385014M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Table 7
Industry-level MPR estimation. This table shows the results of the conditional linear factor model described in Eqs. (8)–(10)
applied to the industries detailed in table B.7. For each day 𝑡 and industry 𝑖, we compute its exposure coefficient 𝛽𝑖,𝑡 using
the following industry-level share of contagion cases:

𝑋𝑖,𝑡 =

∑

𝑓 ∈𝑖

𝜔𝑓 ,𝑡𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡,

where 𝑓 denotes the firms in industry 𝑖, 𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡 is the share of contagion cases in the country in which firm 𝑓 is located, and
𝜔𝑓 ,𝑡 is a value weight equal to the relative value of firm 𝑓 with respect to the total value of the firms in industry 𝑖 at time
𝑡. In panel A, the first (last) two columns refer to the results obtained when the COVID19 factor is measured as the news to
global COVID cases growth (tone of COVID-related tweets). In all cases, we control for the market factor. Both daily excess
returns and market prices of risk are in log units and expressed in EUR. In panel B (C), we report the average exposure
coefficient for each industry when the factor is based on Covid cases (Twitter news). Our sample starts on 02/01/2020 and
ends on 2/22/2022. Estimates and HAC-adjusted standard errors are obtained through GMM.

Panel A: Market price of risk.

Covid cases

Twitter news

coef
se

Industry (𝑖)
Avg𝑡𝛽𝑖,𝑡
Industry (𝑖)
Avg𝑡𝛽𝑖,𝑡
Industry (𝑖)
Avg𝑡𝛽𝑖,𝑡

Industry (𝑖)
Avg𝑡𝛽𝑖,𝑡
Industry (𝑖)
Avg𝑡𝛽𝑖,𝑡
Industry (𝑖)
Avg𝑡𝛽𝑖,𝑡

MPR Covid

−0.001∗∗
(0.000)

10 Energy
−2.092
40 Financials
−1.387
45 IT
−1.103

35 Health
−0.126
60 Real Estate
0.04
25 Cons. Discr.
0.251

MPR Kkt

0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)

MPR Covid

0.006∗∗∗
(0.000)

Panel B: Average Covid Betas - Covid Cases

55 Utilities
−1.869
30 Cons. Staples
−1.375
15 Materials
−1.023

25 Cons. Discr.
−1.684
60 Real Estate
−1.204
35 Health
−0.926

Panel C: Average Twitter Betas - Twitter News

15 Materials
−0.032
30 Cons. Staples
0.077
55 Utilities
0.34

45 IT
−0.002
40 Financials
0.08
10 Energy
0.443

Obs

491
491

MPR Mkt

0.001∗∗
(0.000)

50 Commn.
−1.625
20 Industrials
−1.189

20 Industrials
0.034
50 Commn.
0.197

Table 8
Hourly Conditional Linear Factor Model. This table shows the results of the conditional linear factor model described in Eqs. (8)–(10). Portfolios
are formed on a daily basis according to the relative share of country-specific COVID19 cases measured the day before formation (𝑋𝑡). The
coefficient 𝛽𝑓 ,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝑓 𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡 refers to the exposure of the equity portfolio 𝑓 ∈ {𝐻, 𝑀, 𝐿} to the COVID19 factor. We measure hourly COVID19
news as unexpected improvement in the hourly tone of COVID19-related tweets. Both hourly excess returns and market prices of risk are in log
units. When we control for the market, returns are in USD, the market is measured by the MSCI Global Index and our factor model comprises
a total of two factors. Our real-time data range from 02/01/2020 to 02/22/2022. Estimates and HAC-adjusted standard errors are obtained
through GMM.

𝛽0

𝛽𝐿,1

𝛽𝑀,1

𝛽𝐻,1

𝑀𝑃 𝑅

N.Obs

N. Assets

9.879∗∗∗
(0.712)

−0.090∗∗∗
(0.007)

Hourly log returns
coef
se
Hourly log EUR returns (adjusting for FX)
coef
se
Hourly log returns controlling for the Market
coef
se

−0.158∗∗∗
(0.014)

−0.083∗∗∗
(0.006)

16.892∗∗∗
(1.549)

9.164∗∗∗
(0.598)

6.872∗∗∗
(0.496)

−0.062∗∗∗
(0.005)

Hourly log returns
coef
se
Hourly log EUR returns (adjusting for FX)
coef
se
Hourly log returns controlling for the Market
coef
se

−0.058∗∗∗
(0.004)

−0.109∗∗∗
(0.010)

11.743∗∗∗
(1.072)

6.385∗∗∗
(0.421)

Panel A: equities and bonds, equities betas

4.043∗∗∗
(0.294)

3.773∗∗∗
(0.249)

6.980∗∗∗
(0.643)

2.853∗∗∗
(0.207)

2.673∗∗∗
(0.177)

4.968∗∗∗
(0.457)

Panel B: equities and bonds, bond betas

2.780∗∗∗
(0.201)

2.609∗∗∗
(0.174)

4.831∗∗∗
(0.442)

1.966∗∗∗
(0.144)

1.851∗∗∗
(0.124)

3.439∗∗∗
(0.315)

0.014∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.017∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.009∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.014∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.017∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.009∗∗∗
(0.003)

4190
4190

4190
4190

3951
3951

4190
4190

4190
4190

3951
3951

6
6

6
6

6
6

6
6

6
6

6
6

epidemic conditions. We construct a novel data set that includes (i)
medical announcements related to COVID-19 for a broad cross section
of countries; and (ii) high-frequency data on epidemic news diffused
through Twitter. Across several classes of financial assets and curren-
cies, we provide novel empirical evidence about financial dynamics
surrounding epidemic announcements, both at a daily frequency and
an intra-daily frequency. Formal estimations based on both contagion
data and social media activity about COVID-19 confirm the significant
market price of epidemic risk. We conclude that policies related to the
prevention and containment of contagion could be precious not only
in terms of lives saved but also in terms of preserving global financial

wealth. Future research should study the interplay of our analysis and
the methodology in Diercks et al. (2023).

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Maria Jose Arteaga-Garavito: Visualization, Validation, Super-
vision, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization. Mariano M. Croce: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385015M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Table 9
Vol-Adjusted Conditional Linear Factor Model. This table shows the results of the conditional linear factor model described in Eqs. (8)–
(10). Portfolios are formed on a daily basis according to the relative share of country-specific COVID19 cases measured the day before
formation (𝑋𝑡). The coefficient 𝛽𝑓 ,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝑓 𝑋𝑓 ,𝑡 refers to the exposure of the equity portfolio 𝑓 ∈ {𝐻, 𝑀, 𝐿} to the COVID19 factor.
We measure hourly (daily) COVID19 news as unexpected improvement in the hourly (daily) tone of COVID19-related tweets. We
project this factor on realized market volatility and use the implied residual in our estimation. Both excess returns and market prices
of risk are in log units and are expressed in USD. The market is measured by the MSCI Global Index. Our real-time data range from
02/01/2020 to 02/22/2022. Estimates and HAC-adjusted standard errors are obtained through GMM.

𝛽0

𝛽𝐿,1

𝛽𝑀,1

𝛽𝐻,1

𝑀𝑃 𝑅

N.Obs

N. Assets

Panel A: equities, news from Twitter

Daily log returns
coef
se

−0.312∗∗∗
(0.053)

Hourly log returns
coef
se

−0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

41.132∗∗∗
(5.775)

19.797∗∗∗
(2.585)

6.102∗∗∗
(1.468)

Panel B: equities, news from Twitter

0.453∗∗∗
(0.131)

0.174∗∗∗
(0.055)

0.134∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.006∗∗
(0.003)

0.054∗∗
(0.028)

499
499

4301
4301

3
3

6
6

Table 10
International Flows and News. This table reports the results of the following
linear system:

𝐹 𝐿𝑓

𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑋𝑓

𝑡−1 + 𝜖𝑓

𝑡

where 𝐹 𝐿𝑓
is the flow to funds that invest in portfolio 𝑓 ∈ {𝐻, 𝑀, 𝐿} during
𝑡
week 𝑡 rescaled by portfolio−𝑓 2019 GDP; 𝑋𝑓
𝑡−1 refers to the weekly share
of portfolio-specific COVID19 cases. Portfolios are formed on a weekly basis
according to the relative share of country-specific COVID19 cases measured the
week before formation. Fund flows-to-GDP is expressed in basis points (bps). Our
data range from 02/01/2020 to 07/14/2021 at a weekly frequency. Estimates
and HAC-adjusted standard errors are obtained through GMM.

Bonds

AE

0.247∗∗∗
(0.026)
−0.921∗∗∗
(0.073)
11.234
75

EE

−0.171∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.311∗∗∗
(0.070)
11.825
71

Equities

AE

0.589∗∗∗
(0.051)
−4.500∗∗∗
(0.274)
7.069
75

EE

0.135∗∗∗
(0.036)
−0.996∗∗∗
(0.123)
11.676
71

𝛽0

𝛽1

J-stat
N

analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Paolo Farroni: Visualiza-
tion, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Isabella Wolfskeil: Writing – review & edit-
ing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Software, Methodology, Inves-
tigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

when the markets get covid (Reference data) (Mendeley Data)
.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

Ai, H., Han, L.J., Pan, X.N., Xu, L., 2022b. The cross section of the monetary policy

announcement premium. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1).

Albuquerque, R.A., Koskinen, Y.J., Yang, S., Zhang, C., 2020. Love in the time
of COVID-19: The resiliency of environmental and social stocks. CEPR’s Covid
Economics Review No. 11.

Augustin, P., Sokolovski, V., Subrahmanyam, M.G., Tomio, D., 2021. In sickness and

in debt: The COVID-19 impact on sovereign credit risk. J. Financ. Econ.

Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., 2016. Measuring economic policy uncertainty*. Q.

J. Econ. 131 (4), 1593.

Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., Kost, K., Sammon, M., Viratyosin, T., 2020. The
unprecedented stock market reaction to COVID-19. Rev. Asset Pric. Stud. 10 (4).
Bianchi, F., Cram, R., Kung, H., 2021. Using social media to identify the effects of

congressional viewpoints on asset prices. Working Paper.

Bonaccolto, G., Borri, N., Consiglio, A., 2019. Breakup and default risks in the Eurozone.

Available at SSRN 3487453.

Bretscher, L., Hsu, A., Simasek, P., Tamoni, A., 2020a. COVID-19 and the cross-section

of equity returns: Impact and transmission. Rev. Asset Pric. Stud. 10 (4).

Bretscher, L., Hsu, A., Tamoni, A., 2020b. The supply channel of uncertainty shocks
and the cross-section of returns: Evidence from the COVID-19 crisis. Available at
SSRN 3588418.

Breugem, M., Corvino, R., Marfe, R., L., S., 2022. Pandemic tail risk. Working Paper.
Bybee, L., Kelly, B.T., Manela, A., Xiu, D., 2020a. Business news and business cycles.

Working Paper.

Bybee, L., Kelly, B.T., Manela, A., Xiu, D., 2020b. The structure of economic news.

Natl. Bureau Econ. Res.

Carletti, E., Oliviero, T., Pagano, M., Pelizzon, L., Subrahmanyam, M.G., 2020.
The COVID-19 shock and equity shortfall: Firm-level evidence from Italy. CEPR
Discussion Paper No. DP14831.

Cororaton, A., Rosen, S., 2020. Public firm borrowers of the US paycheck protection

program. CEPR’s Covid Economics Review No. 15.

Da, Z., Engelberg, J., Gao, P., 2011.

In search of attention. J. Finance 66
(5), 1461–1499. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2011.01679.x, arXiv:https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2011.01679.x, URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2011.01679.x.

Darmouni, O., Siani, K., Xiao, K., 2023. Nonbank fragility in credit markets: Evidence

from a two-layer asset demand system. NBER Working Paper.

Diercks, A.M., Hsu, A., Tamoni, A., 2023. When it rains it pours: Cascading uncertainty

shocks. J. Polit. Econ.

Engle, R.F., Giglio, S., Kelly, B., Lee, H., Stroebel, J., 2020. Hedging climate change

news. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (3).

Epstein, L., Zin, S.E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57,
937–969.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2017. International tests of a five-factor asset pricing model.

J. Financ. Econ. 123 (3).

Garmaise, M., Levi, Y., Lustig, H., 2021. Spending less after (seemingly) bad news.

Working Paper.

Giglio, S., Maggiori, M., Stroebel, J., Utkus, S., 2020. Inside the mind of a stock market

crash. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01831.

Goldstein, I., Koijen, R., Mueller, H., 2021. COVID-19 and its impact on financial

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103850.

markets and the real economy. Rev. Financ. Stud..

References

Acharya, V.V., Steffen, S., 2020. The risk of being a fallen angel and the corporate
dash for cash in the midst of COVID. CEPR’s Covid Economics Review No. 10.
Ai, H., Bansal, R., 2018. Risk preferences and the macroeconomic announcement

premium. Econometrica 86 (4).

Ai, H., Bansal, R., Han, L.J., 2022a. Information acquisition and the pre-announcement

drift. Working Paper.

Gormsen, N.J., Koijen, R.S.J., 2020. Coronavirus: Impact on stock prices and growth

expectations. Rev. Asset Pric. Stud. 10 (4), 574–597.

Gormsen, N.J., Koijen, R., Martin, I., 2021. Implied dividend volatility and expected

growth. Working Paper.

Han, L.J., 2020. Iannouncements, expectations, and stock returns with asymmetric

information. Working Paper.

Hartley, J.S., Rebucci, A., 2020. An Event Study of COVID-19 Central Bank Quantitative
Easing in Advanced and Emerging Economies. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP14841.
Hassan, T.A., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., Tahoun, A., 2020. Firm-level exposure to

epidemic diseases: COVID-19, SARS, and H1n1. Working Paper Series.

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385016M.J. Arteaga-Garavito et al.

Hassan, T.A., Hollander, S., Van Lent, L., Tahoun, A., 2019. Firm-level political risk:

Ramelli, S., Wagner, A., 2020. Feverish stock price reactions to COVID-19. Review of

Measurement and effects. Q. J. Econ. 134 (4), 2135–2202.

Corporate Finance Studies.

Kaniel, R., Wang, P., 2020. Unmasking mutual fund derivative use during the COVID-19

Schmeling, M., Wagner, C., 2023. Does central bank tone move asset prices? J. Financ.

crisis. CEPR’s Covid Economics Review No. 49.

Quant. Anal.

Koijen, R.S.J., Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. J. Polit.

Econ. 127 (4).

Lucca, D.O., Moench, E., 2015. The pre-FOMC announcement drift. J. Finance 70 (1).
Maggiori, M., 2017. Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve

Sievert, C., Shirley, K., 2014. LDAvis: A method for visualizing and interpreting topics.
In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Language Learning, Visualization,
and Interfaces.

Sinagl, P., 2020. Cash-flow risk and industry response to COVID-19 outbreak. Available

currencies. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (10).

at SSRN 3566511.

Manela, A., Moreira, A., 2017. News implied volatility and disaster concerns. J. Financ.

Econ. 123 (1), 137–162.

Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L.D.W., 2020. Working remotely and the supply-side impact

of COVID-19. Working Paper.

Twedt, B., Rees, L., 2012. Reading between the lines: An empirical examination of
qualitative attributes of financial analysts’ reports. J. Account. Public Policy 31
(1), 1–21.

van Binsbergen, S., Mukhopadhyay, M., Sharma, V., 2022. (Almost) 200 years of

Pástor, L., Vorsatz, B., 2020. Mutual fund performance and flows during the COVID-19

news-based economic sentiment. Working Paper.

crisis. Rev. Asset Pric. Stud. 10 (4).

JournalofFinancialEconomics157(2024)10385017