Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Journal of Financial Economics 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec 

Monetary tightening and U.S. bank fragility in 2023: Mark-to-market losses 
and uninsured depositor runs?

✰ 

Erica Xuewei Jiang a, Gregor Matvos b, Tomasz Piskorski c, Amit Seru d, * 
a University of Southern California, United States 
b Northwestern University and NBER, United States 
c Columbia University and NBER, United States 
d Stanford Graduate School of Business, Hoover Institution, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, and NBER, United States   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

We develop a conceptual framework and an empirical methodology to analyze the effect of rising interest rates 
on the value of U.S. bank assets and bank stability. We mark-to-market the value of banks’ assets due to interest 
rate  increases from  Q1  2022  to  Q1  2023, revealing  an  average  decline  of  10  %,  totaling  about  $2 trillion  in 
aggregate. We present a model illustrating how asset value declines due to higher rates can lead to self-fulfilling 
solvency runs even when banks’ assets are fully liquid. Banks with high asset losses, low capital, and, critically, 
high  uninsured  leverage  are  most  fragile.  A  case  study  of  the  failed  Silicon  Valley  Bank  confirms  the  model 
insights. Our empirical measures of bank fragility suggest that, in the absence of regulatory intervention, many 
U.S. banks would have been at risk of self-fulfilling solvency runs.   

Original content: Replication Code and Pseudo 
Dataset for "Monetary Tightening and U.S. 
Bank Fragility in 2023: Mark-to-Market Losses 
and Uninsured Depositor Runs?" (Original 
data)  

JEL classifications: 
G2 
L5 

Keywords: 
Monetary tightening 
Uninsured depositors 
Solvency Runs 

1. Introduction 

Silicon  Valley  Bank  (SVB)  failed  in  a  “run”  on  March  10,  2023, 
following a sharp tightening of monetary policy from March 2022. The 
idea that rising interest rates can lead to bank instability is intuitive and 
has  historic  precedent  in  the  savings  and  loan  (S&L)  crisis.1  Tighter 

monetary policy has a significant negative impact on the value of long- 
term assets on bank balance sheets. If banks’ asset values decline relative 
to  liabilities,  such  declines  can  lead  to  bank  instability  through  two 
channels.  First,  a  bank  can  become  fundamentally  insolvent  if  asset 
values exceed the value of its liabilities. This is particularly likely for 
banks that have limited deposit franchise and need to increase deposit 

✰

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank Viral Acharya, Anat Admati, Sumit Agarwal, John Cochrane, Peter DeMarzo, Douglas Diamond, Darrell 
Duffie, Stephen Haber, Raj Iyer, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ross Levine, Hanno Lustig, Raghuram Rajan, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein, Toni Whited (editor), Luigi Zingales, 
and seminar and conference participants at the Bank for International Settlements, Chicago Booth, UCLA, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), In-
ternational Monetary Fund (IMF), U.S. Department of the Treasury, Financial Stability Board, Fannie Mae, Mortgage Bankers Association, Asian Bureau of Finance 
and Economic Research Annual Conference, Hoover Monetary Economics Conference, NBER Corporate Associates Research Symposium, NBER Summer Corporate 
Finance Meetings, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research Financial Stability Conference, and the Bank of England Workshop on 
Household Finance and Housing for helpful comments and suggestions. First Version: March 13. 2023 

* Correspondence author at:The Steven and Roberta Denning Professor of Finance at Stanford Graduate School of Business and Senior Fellow at Hoover Institution. 

Address: 665 Knight Way, Stanford, CA 94305 USA. 
E-mail address: aseru@stanford.edu (A. Seru).   

1  In the 1980s and 1990s, nearly one-third of S&Ls failed due to losses incurred from long-term fixed-rate mortgages that declined in value when interest rates 

surged. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103899 
Received 28 September 2023; Received in revised form 14 June 2024; Accepted 15 June 2024   

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)103899Availableonline4July20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

rates as interest rates rise.2 Second, uninsured depositors may run on the 
bank,  causing  it  to  fail;  this  is  especially  the  case  because  uninsured 
depositors comprise about half of bank deposits (Egan et al., 2017). On 
the other hand, it is far from clear that asset losses induced by monetary 
tightening  are  sufficiently  large  to  induce  self-fulfilling  runs  by  unin-
sured  depositors.  Banks  may  have  a  deposit  franchise  that  could 
potentially mitigate a portion of the decrease in value on their asset side 
(Drechsler,  Savov,  and  Schnabl  2021).  Moreover,  while  S&Ls’  assets 
were illiquid, in the current banking environment, liquid assets repre-
sent a significant part of bank balance sheets. This makes it difficult for 
runs to arise in the canonical framework of Diamond and Dybvig (1983), 
in which asset illiquidity is paramount. 

We develop a conceptual framework and an empirical methodology 
to analyze the effect of rising interest rates on the value of U.S. bank 
assets and bank stability when bank assets are liquid. We then apply this 
framework to monetary tightening episode of 2022. In the first part of 
the paper, we measure the losses due to interest rate increases from Q1 
2022 to Q1 2023. Because bank call reports do not mark significant parts 
of  their  assets  to  their  market  values,  we  provide  a  mark-to-market 
calculation  of  these  losses  using  tradable  and  liquid  market  indexes. 
Using the case of SVB, we show that the asset side alone cannot explain 
its failure. SVB was not an extreme outlier from the perspective of asset 
losses but was an outlier from the perspective of its liabilities; 92.5 % of 
its deposits were uninsured, leading to significant withdrawals that ul-
timately resulted in the bank’s collapse within two days. In other words, 
despite its liquid balance sheet, the SVB failure had the characteristics of 
a run by uninsured depositors. 

In the second part of the paper, we present a model that illustrates 
that banks with liquid assets can become exposed to self-fulfilling sol-
vency runs when monetary policy tightens. We model the existence of 
solvency  runs,  which  arise  even  if  banks’  assets  are  fully  liquid.  This 
differentiates the model from liquidity run models. We consider a model 
of bank runs without assets illiquidity like in Egan, Matvos, and Hor-
tacsu (2017) but extend it to study the role of maturity transformation: 
banks hold long maturity assets, exposing banks to asset declines due to 
monetary policy, and fund them with demandable deposits. Banks can 
also realize value on their liability side through their deposit franchise, 
as in Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2021). Our model underscores the 
role  of  bank  uninsured  leverage,  the  concept  developed  in  Jiang  et  al. 
(2020). We then use the insights from the model to compute several new 
empirical measures of bank fragility for the sample of all U.S. banks. 

We start our analysis by observing that long-dated assets experienced 
significant  value  declines  following  the  monetary  tightening  from  Q1 
2022 onwards initiated by the Federal Reserve to fight high inflation. 
From March 2022 to March 2023, the federal funds rate rose sharply 
from 0.08 % to 4.57 % (Fig. 1A). As a result, long-dated assets experi-
enced significant value declines. For instance, the exchange-traded fund 
(ETF)  that  tracks  the  market  value  of  residential  mortgages  (SPDR 
Portfolio Mortgage-Backed Bond ETF [SPMB]) declined by more than 10 
% (Fig. 1B) from Q1 2022 to Q1 2023. Similarly, the market value of 
commercial mortgages indicated by the iShares commercial mortgage- 
backed securities (CMBS) ETF declined by more than 10 % during this 
time.  Long-maturity  Treasury  bonds  were  particularly  affected  by 
monetary  policy  tightening,  with  10–20-year  and  20+-year  Treasury 
bonds losing about 25 % and 30 % of their market value, respectively, as 
suggested  by  iShares  Treasury  ETF  (Fig.  1C).  Overall,  long-duration 
assets like those held on bank balance sheets experienced very signifi-
cant declines during the Fed’s monetary policy tightening. 

2  Banks in concentrated markets and with stronger deposit franchise can be 
slower  to  raise  their  deposit  rates  in  response  to  raising  interest  rates  (e.g., 
Hannan  and  Berger  1991;  Neumark  and  Sharpe  1992;  Drechsler  Savov,  and 
Schnabl 2017; Egan, Matvos, and Hortascu 2017; Wang et al. 2022). This can 
reduce  the  market  value  of  their  liabilities  (Drechsler,  Savov,  and  Schnabl 
2021). 

We mark to market losses on banks’  assets due to interest rate in-
creases  from  Q1  2022  to  Q1  2023  using  market-level  prices  of  long- 
duration  assets.3  We  examine  losses  on  banks’  assets  including  their 
loan portfolios held to maturity, which have not been marked to market, 
as well as securities linked to real estate (e.g., mortgage-backed secu-
rities  [MBS],  CMBS,  U.S.  Treasurys,  and  other  asset-backed  securities 
[ABS]). These assets comprise more than two-thirds of bank assets (72 % 
of $24 trillion). Our findings indicate that by March 2023, bank assets 
declined on average by 10 %. There are large differences in losses across 
banks,  with  the  bottom  5th  percentile  experiencing  a  decline  of 
approximately  20  %.  In  aggregate,  the  market  value  of  U.S.  banking 
system assets became $2.2 trillion lower than suggested by their book 
value, which is on the order of aggregate bank capital (Figure A1). 

A  case  study  of  SVB  confirms  that  banks’  asset  losses  alone  are 
insufficient to understand how monetary policy tightening affects bank 
stability. Bank capitalization, the central measure used by regulators to 
assess bank stability, is also insufficient. The share of uninsured funding, 
defined  as  uninsured  debt  over  assets  in  Jiang  et  al.  (2020)  plays  a 
central  role  in  driving  bank  run  risk.  The  SVB  case  illustrates  that 
intuition. About 500 banks (10 %) had larger unrecognized losses than 
SVB.  Similarly,  10  %  of  banks  had  lower  capital  than  SVB  prior  to 
monetary  tightening,  as  well  as  post-tightening,  accounting  for 
mark-to-market losses. On the other hand, SVB had a disproportional 
share  of  uninsured  funding:  only  1  %  of  banks  had  higher  uninsured 
leverage. To put this number in context, a bank in the 5th percentile of 
uninsured leverage uses 6 % of uninsured debt. For this bank, 94 % of 
funding is not run-prone, comprising equity and deposits. For SVB, 78 % 
of its assets were funded by uninsured deposits. This fact suggests that 
uninsured deposits played a critical role in the failure of SVB. 

The SVB run, as well as subsequent bank failures present somewhat 
of a puzzle from the perspective of canonical panic run in the spirit of 
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) or Goldstein and Pauzner (2005). In these 
models, runs occur because bank assets are illiquid, like the mortgage 
loans of S&Ls in the 1980s and 1990s.4  But 62 % of SVB assets were 
liquid  cash  and  securities.  So  even  if  78  %  of  SVB  liabilities  were 
run-prone, SVB should likely not have been subject to a classic run due to 
illiquidity of assets. In fact, the average U.S. bank has a large share of 
liquid assets, with cash comprising 14 % and securities another 25 % 
(Table  A1).  This  makes  it  difficult  for  runs  to  arise  in  the  canonical 
framework in which asset illiquidity drives run behavior. 

To analyze how monetary policy can trigger panic-induced runs in 
banks with liquid assets, we next develop a model, which is similar in 
spirit to contemporaneous work by Drechsler et al. (2023) but is simpler 
on a number of dimensions.5  Banks have market power in the deposit 
market, which allows them to pay below the risk-free rate on insured 
and uninsured deposits. Unlike insured depositors, uninsured depositors 
stand to lose a part of their deposits if the bank fails, giving them in-
centives to withdraw their funds if they believe the bank is not sound. By 
doing so, they make the  bank more likely to fail, justifying the with-
drawal behavior. In other words, panic is rational. We call this type of a 

3  For assessments of U.S. banks’  exposure to credit and interest rate risk in 
periods  preceding  the  2022–2023  monetary  tightening  episode,  see,  among 
others, Begenau, Piazessi, and Schneider (2015); Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieu-
werburgh (2016); Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017, 2021); Egan, Matvos, 
and Hortacsu (2017); Atkeson et al. (2018); Begenau and Stafford (2019); Xiao 
(2020), and Wang et al. (2022).  

4  See  also  Chen  et  al.  (2020)  for  empirical  evidence  on  panic-based  runs 

based on the uninsured depositors’ flows.  

5  The  aim  of  our  stylized  model  is  to  underscore  the  key  economic  forces 
behind the bank runs we focus on, taking the composition of the asset and li-
ability sides of banks as predetermined. This serves as a foundation for moti-
vating  our  empirical  measures  of  bank  stability,  our  main  focus.  In  contrast, 
Drechsler  et  al.  (2023)  consider  a  more  comprehensive  model  since  they  are 
interested in analyzing theoretically the potential risk management strategies 
that banks could employ to mitigate their interest rate exposure. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038992E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 1. Fed Tightening and Asset Prices. 
Panel (a) plots the time series of the Fed funds rates (in%). Panel (b) plots the market price of the portfolio of RMBS, CMBS, and U.S. Treasurys relative to their values 
in Q1 2022 (normalized to one). Panel (c) plots the corresponding market prices of U.S. Treasurys with different maturities, relative to their value in Q1 2022. The 
maturity structure is chosen to match the asset maturity breakdowns in the call reports. We plot the prices from Q1 2022 till Q1 2023. Data sources: Fed funds rate is 
from the Federal Reserve System data, RMBS market price is from the SPDR Portfolio Mortgage-Backed Bond ETF (SPMB), CMBS market price is from the iShares 
CMBS ETF (CMBS), and the U.S. Treasury market price indexes are from the S&P U.S. Treasury Bond Index and the iShares Treasury ETF. 

run  a  self-fulfilling  solvency  run.  Our  model  illustrates  that  tighter 
monetary  policy  exposes  banks  to  such  self-fulfilling  solvency  runs. 
Banks invest in long and short maturity assets, exposing banks to asset 
declines  when rates rise. When interest rates are relatively low, bank 
asset values are high enough that they can survive the withdrawal of all 
uninsured deposits. Then it is not rational for any individual depositor to 
withdraw, and the bank is immune to self-fulfilling solvency runs. When 
interest  rates  rise  sufficiently,  and  thus  asset  values  decline, 
self-fulfilling  runs  are  possible.  In  fact,  we  illustrate  that bank  equity 
values can increase as interest rates rise if uninsured depositors believe 
banks are stable, but this also exposes banks to self-fulfilling runs by the 
same  uninsured  depositors.  Banks  with  smaller  initial  capitalization, 
higher  uninsured  leverage,  and  higher  share  of  awake  depositors  are 
more susceptible to such runs. 

Motivated  by  our  theoretical  framework,  we  develop  several 
empirical  measures  of  bank  stability,  assessing  them  across  various 
scenarios  of  uninsured  depositor  withdrawal  behaviors.  First,  we 
examine Uninsured Deposit Coverage Ratio, which investigates whether 
the marked-to-market value of bank assets is sufficient to cover with-
drawals  by  uninsured  depositors.  Second,  we  analyze  Insured  Deposit 
Coverage Ratio, which determines whether the remaining value of bank 
assets, following a hypothetical withdrawal by uninsured depositors, is 
adequate to cover the face value of insured deposits. Third, we examine 
Capital  Ratio,  which  assesses  the  impact  of  withdrawals  by  uninsured 
depositors  on  the  reported  bank  capital.  This  assessment  reflects  the 
perspective  that  reaching  a  negative  value  of  book  equity  can  also 
trigger  bank  closure  by  regulators.  Last,  we  evaluate  whether  the 
marked-to-market  value  of  assets  is  adequate  to  cover  all  non-equity 
liabilities  (Extreme  Insolvency).  It’s  important  to  note  that  the 

assessments based on these measures implicitly incorporate the role of 
regulators in resolving bank failures (Granja, Matvos, and Seru 2017). 
Overall, our calculations based on these measures suggest that, in the 
absence of regulatory intervention, many U.S. banks would have been at 
risk of self-fulfilling solvency runs, contingent upon the share of unin-
sured depositors considering withdrawal of their funds. In interpreting 
this assessment, it’s crucial to consider it within our multiple equilibria 
framework. Since we lack a robust theory regarding the distribution of 
sunspots, we cannot determine the probability of such runs occurring at 
each bank. Put simply, our framework and results do not rule out the 
possibility  of  runs  occurring  only  among  a  subset  of  banks  that  we 
identify as at risk. Additionally, our analysis does not account for the 
impact of recent policy interventions in the banking system because it is 
confined  to  the  pre-policy  intervention  stage.  In  this  regard,  it  is 
important  to  acknowledge  that as  of  Q1:2024  only  a  few  banks  have 
failed. Both of these aspects could explain that as of 2024:Q1 only a few 
banks we identify as having elevated run risk have actually failed. 

This being said, our empirical measures can help identify the banks 
that are more or less likely  to be subject to solvency run  risk, absent 
policy intervention, which could be of considerable interest to regula-
tors. In that regard the subsequent bank failures of First Republic and 
Signature  Bank  have  similar  characteristics  to  the  banks  at  risk  we 
identify: a significant decline in the value of their assets and a high share 
of funding from uninsured depositors. The collapse of all these banks 
was  also  preceded  by  significant  withdrawals  of  funds  by  uninsured 
depositors. 

We conclude by discussing several extensions of our work. First, we 
note  that  banks  did  not  hedge  a  vast  majority  of  the  decline  of  their 
assets due to increase in interest rates. Second, a large decline in banks’ 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038993E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

asset values quantified above has significantly eroded the banks’ ability 
to withstand adverse credit events, including potential distress on banks’ 
commercial real estate (CRE) loans. Finally, we discuss several possible 
extensions of our modeling framework. 

Related literature 

There  is  a  vast  literature  on  banking  and  financial  intermediation 
which we cannot do justice to here. We view our contribution to this 
literature  as  threefold.  First,  we  develop  a  conceptual  framework  to 
analyze how an increase in interest rates (e.g., due to monetary policy 
tightening) leads to runs in an environment where bank assets are liquid 
and show that tighter monetary policy can expose banks to self-fulfilling 
solvency runs. We show how run exposure depends on the interaction of 
bank characteristics on the asset side (asset duration) with characteris-
tics  on  the  liability  side,  capital,  and  critically,  uninsured  leverage—a 
metric  developed  in  Jiang  et  al.  (2020).  Second,  we  develop  several 
empirical  measures  of  bank  exposure  to  self-fulfilling  solvency  runs. 
Third, we analyze the effect of rising interest rates on the value of U.S. 
bank  assets  and  apply  these  measures  to  stress-test  the  U.S.  banking 
system in March of 2023. 

Our model is related to a vast literature on bank runs. A large part of 
this  literature,  including  the  seminal  contribution  of  Diamond  and 
Dybvig (1983), focuses on asset illiquidity as a central factor driving the 
runs.  We  instead  focus  on  bank  runs  in  an  environment  where  bank 
assets are liquid such as Egan, Matvos, and Hortacsu (2017). We study 
the role of monetary policy in inducing “self-fulfilling solvency runs.” 

Our analysis also emphasizes the importance of accounting for the 
value creation by banks on both their asset and liability (deposit) side 
when analyzing the effects of monetary policy. It has been long estab-
lished in the banking literature that banks in concentrated markets and 
with stronger deposit franchise can be slower to raise their deposit rates 
in  response  to  raising  interest  rates,  which  could  allow  them  to  earn 
positive rents on their deposits (e.g., Hannan and Berger 1991; Neumark 
and Sharpe 1992; Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2017; Egan, Matvos, 
and Hortacsu 2017; Sunderam 2022; Wang et al. 2022). Our work is also 
related  to  Drechsler,  Savov,  and  Schnabl  (2021),  who  argue  that  the 
deposit franchise has hedging benefits that effectively allow the banks to 
engage in the “maturity transformation without an interest rate risk.” We 
show that this argument may need to be amended because of the pos-
sibility  of  self-fulfilling  solvency  runs.  Interpreted  within  our  model, 
Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2021) focus on the hedging properties of 
the deposit franchise in the good equilibrium. We show that an alter-
native equilibrium exists in which such deposit franchise benefits can be 
eroded precisely in the states of the world when they would have been 
the most valuable due to solvency runs. 

Our paper focusing on the interaction of monetary policy with bank 
stability  is  also  connected  to  a  large  literature  focusing  on  the  pass- 
through of monetary policy through financial markets and the banking 
sector. In this regard, our analysis suggests that U.S. banks have signif-
icant risk exposure to higher interest rates that can lead to solvency bank 
runs.  While  outside  the  scope  of  our  work,  such  fragility  could  have 
adverse effects on the real economy. This fragility of the U.S. banking 
system to higher rates can potentially constrain the conduct of monetary 
policy and should be considered by monetary policymakers and finan-
cial regulators. 

Finally,  there  is  also  emerging  literature  on  banking  issues  post- 
SVB’s failure. Drechsler et al. (2023) and Haddad, Hartman-Glaser, and 
Muir (2023) also provide models of how solvency bank runs can interact 
with  monetary  policy  that feature  broadly  similar  mechanisms to  the 
one underlying our conceptual framework, while also including richer 
descriptions of some mechanisms at work. In particular, Drechsler et al. 
(2023) also find that the bank run equilibrium is more likely to exist 
when the interest rate is high, the share of uninsured deposits is high, or 
the uninsured deposit beta is low. Moreover, and beyond our simplified 
framework, they endogenize banks’ investment and financing decisions 

and show that the uninsured deposit franchise can pose a risk manage-
ment dilemma. In addition, Haddad et al. (2023) highlight reasons why 
even insured depositors may withdraw funds if they believe the bank 
will fail. Other papers in this literature include contributions by Cookson 
et al. (2023), Flannery and Sorescu (2023), Jiang et al. (2023), Granja 
et al. (2024), and Koont, Santos, and Zingales (2023). 

2. Banks’ hidden losses: “Marking to market” bank assets 

To understand the impact of interest rate increases on banks’ asset 
values,  we  begin  by  examining  bank  balance  sheets,  following  Jiang 
et al. (2020). Since a substantial portion of bank portfolios, specifically 
loans held to maturity, are not marked to market, we rely on ETFs across 
various  asset  classes  to  conduct  our  analysis.  We  focus  on  assets 
comprising more than two-thirds of bank assets (72 % of $24 trillion). 
Among  these,  for  the  average  bank,  real  estate  loans  account  for 
approximately  42  %  of  their  assets  (Table  A1).  Moreover,  securities 
linked  to  real  estate  (e.g.,  MBS,  CMBS,  Treasurys,  and  other  ABS) 
constitute  approximately  24  %  of  the  average  bank’s  assets.  Notably, 
since we do not mark all the banks’ assets, we may be underestimating 
the effect of interest rates on the remaining portion of the bank balance 
sheet, which we leave unchanged. 

2.1. Methodology and data 

We mark bank assets to market in three steps:  

1)  We obtain the asset maturity and repricing data for all FDIC-insured 
banks in their regulatory filings (Call Report Forms 031 and 051) in 
Q1 2022. Banks are required to report the values of residential MBS 
and  nonresidential  MBS  securities  (Schedule  RC-B).  They  are  also 
required to report the values of loans secured by first liens on 1–4- 
family residential properties and all loans and leases excluding loans 
that  are  secured  by  first  liens  on  1–4-family  residential  properties 
(Schedule RC–C) by maturity and repricing breakdowns.6  

2)  We  use  traded  indexes  in  real  estate  and  Treasurys  to  impute  the 
market  value  of  real  estate  loans  held  on  bank  balance  sheets.7 
Longer-duration fixed-income assets were affected more by interest 
rate increases, so we want to adjust the market values of loans based 
on  their  maturity.  Because  of  limited  maturity  information  across 
residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBS)  maturities,  we  use 
one  RMBS  ETF  and  then  adjust  across  maturities  using  Treasury 
prices. As a baseline, we use changes in the market price of the U.S. 
Treasury bonds and RMBS from Q1 2022 to Q1 2023. To adjust for 
maturity, we use the iShares U.S. Treasury Bond ETFs and the S&P 
Treasury  Bond  Indices  across  various  maturities  that  match  the 
maturity and repricing breakdowns in the call reports. For each of 
these  ETFs  and  indices,  we  calculate  the  price  declines  since  Q1 
2022, plotted in Fig. 1.  

3)  We compute the mark-to-market value loss as: 

∑

Loss =

RMBS multiplier × (RMBSt + Mortgaget) × ΔTreasuryPricet

t

+ Treasury and Other Securities and Loanst × ΔTreasuryPricet,

where  t indicates the maturity  and repricing  breakdowns: less  than 1 
year, 1–3  years, 3–5  years, 5–10  years, 10–15 years, and  15 years or 

6  The breakdowns are “less than three months,” “three months to one year,” 
“one  to  three  years,”  “three  to  five  years,”  “five  to  fifteen  years,”  and  “more 
than fifteen years.”  

7  Variable-rate notes are recorded as maturity at the repricing date in bank 

call reports. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038994E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

more. ΔTreasuryPricet  is the market price change of Treasury bonds with 
maturity t from Q1 2022 to Q1 2023 that we obtained in the second step. 
RMBS and residential mortgages have additional risk due to prepayment 
risk. We account for this by constructing an RMBS multiplier that uses 
average  market  price  changes  of  RMBS  and  Treasury  bonds  across 
various maturities over this period: 

RMBS multiplier =

ΔiShare MBS ETF
ΔS&P Treasury Bond Index

.

We then define the mark-to-market asset value in Q1 2023 as total 
assets in Q1 2022 minus the mark-to-market value loss defined above. In 
some ways, our estimates are conservative, since we only marked down 
the value of real estate loans and other assets and securities and loans 
discussed above, rather than all assets on the bank balance sheets. On 
the  other  hand,  in  our  main  analysis  we  do  not  account  for  possible 
interest rate hedges that banks could have entered, potentially offsetting 
decline in value due to interest rate change. In an extension of our main 
analysis (Section 5.1), we show that the use of hedging and other interest 
rate derivatives was not large enough to offset a vast majority of the loss 
in the value of U.S. banks’ assets that we quantify. 

2.2. Declines in the value of banks’ assets 

Marking the value of real estate loans, government bonds, and other 
securities results in significant declines in bank assets. Table 1 shows the 
aggregate losses in the U.S. banking system and their distribution among 
small and large banks and global systemically important banks (GSIBs). 
In total, the U.S. banking system’s market value of assets is $2.2 trillion 
lower than suggested by their book value of assets as of Q1 2023.8 This 
estimate  is  similar  to  the  back-of-the-envelope  $2.16  trillion  loss  in 
Granja et al. (2024), derived from the reported duration of public bank 
assets.9 

We present the distribution of asset declines due to unrealized losses 
in Fig. 2A. The median value of banks’ unrealized losses is around 9 % 
after marking to market. The 5 % of banks with the worst unrealized 
losses experience asset declines of about 20 %. We note that these losses 
amount  to  a  stunning  96  %  of  the  pre-tightening  aggregate  bank 
capitalization. 

The  losses  do  differ  slightly  across  the  size  distribution.  They  are 
smallest for GSIBs at 7.4 % and largest for large non-GSIB banks at 10 %. 
Note that there are also differences in the uses of interest rate hedges 
across the size distribution of banks (especially GSIBs), as we discuss in 
Section 5.1. There are substantial differences in the types of loans from 
which the losses arise. For GSIBs, RMBS are the largest part of the losses, 
and for small banks, it is other loans. 

Perhaps somewhat puzzling at first, the recently failed SVB does not 
stand out as much in the distribution of marked-to-market losses. About 
11  %  of  banks  —  i.e.,  more  than  500  other  banks  —  suffered  worse 
marked-to-market losses on their portfolio (Fig. 2). 

2.3. Robustness 

In this subsection we discuss the robustness of our methodology and 
the associated asset value declines estimates due to the rising interest 
rates. 

First, we mark to market 75 % of bank assets, effectively treating the 
rest as having a duration of 0. For assets with insufficient information in 

8 Liquid RMBS indices are based on loan pools with shorter contractual ma-
turities than the stated maturity of real-estate-related loans and securities, and 
thus  experience  lower  losses.  As  discussed  later,  assigning  much  shorter 
maturity to long-term residential real estate loans and RMBS results in aggre-
gate asset declines in the U.S. banking system well in excess of $1 trillion.  

9  The reported duration of 4.6 years implies a 9% decline in bank asset values 

because of a two-percentage-point increase in the 10-year Treasury yield. 

Table 1 
Mark-to-Market Statistics by Bank Size.   

(1) 
All 
Banks 

2.2T 
28.6M 
(6.7B) 
13.2 
(19.2) 
15.5 

(35.1) 
19.9 

(33.4) 
32.8 
(32.7) 
9.2 
(4.7) 
24.2 

(14.1) 
4844 

(2) 
Small (0, 
1.384B) 

146.0B 
22.3M 
(39.1 M) 
11.4 
(18.5) 
17.0 

(37.5) 
19.8 

(35.3) 
32.7 
(34.3) 
9.1 
(4.8) 
22.7 

(12.6) 
4090 

Aggregate Loss 
Bank-Level Loss 

Share RMBS 

Share Treasury 
and Other 

Share Residential 
Mortgage 

Share Other Loan 

Loss/Asset 

Uninsured Deposit/ 

MM Asset 

Number of Banks 

(3) 
Large (non-GSIB) 
[1.384B,) 

(4)  
GSIB 

623.2B 
306.7M 
(2.3B) 
22.2 
(19.8) 
10.5 

(14.6) 
20.0 

(19.5) 
34.4 
(21.5) 
10.0 
(4.4) 
35.8 

(16.0) 
710 

1.4T 
9.9B  
(62.2B) 
42.6  
(34.0) 
7.8  

(17.3) 
24.6  

(32.4) 
7.3  
(30.5) 
7.4  
(5.6) 
37.1  

(19.4) 
44 

This table presents the descriptive statistics of our key metrics after marking to 
market  the  asset  values  for  each  FDIC-insured  depository  institution  in  the 
United States. Column (1) shows these statistics for all the banks, Column (2) for 
small banks, Column (3) for large and non-systemically important banks (non- 
GSIB), and Column (4) for systemically important banks (GSIB banks). Bank size 
is based on the reported bank asset value as of Q1 2022. Small banks have assets 
less than $1.384 billion, the Community Reinvestment Act asset size thresholds 
for  large  banks.  Large (non-GSIB)  banks  have  assets  greater  than  or  equal  to 
$1.384 billion. GSIB banks are classified according to bank regulators’ definition 
as of Q1 2022. We also assign GSIB status to U.S. chartered banks affiliated with 
holding companies that are classified as GSIB. The first row shows the aggregate 
loss, defined  as  the sum  of the  dollar  loss  at each bank  based on marking  to 
market their Q1 2022 balance sheets. Other rows in the table report bank-level 
statistics. Bank-level statistics are based on the sample median values. Numbers 
in parentheses are the standard deviations. Loss for each bank is computed based 
on  marking  to  market  all  its  securities  and  loans  (see  text)  according  to  the 
market price growth from Q1 2022 to Q1 2023. We also decompose these dollar 
losses into those from RMBS, Treasury, and other securities; loans secured by 
residential 1- to 4-family properties (residential mortgage); and other loans. We 
then report them in terms of the percentage of total losses. Loss/Asset at the bank 
level  is  the  loss  as  a  percentage  of  the  book  value  of  assets  as  of  Q1  2022. 
Uninsured  Deposit/MM  Asset  is  the  uninsured  deposit  amount  of  Q1  2022 
divided by the mark-to-market asset value (MM Asset) as of Q1 2023. Note that 
our  analyses  are  done  at  the  bank  charter  level  instead  of  the  bank  holding 
company  level.  Sources:  Bank  call  reports  in  Q1  2022  and  various  ETF  and 
indices price data as described in the main text. 

call reports to apply our method, we take a conservative approach in 
assigning  duration  of  0.  Assigning  even  a  short  duration  to  those 
remaining  (non-cash)  assets  will  generate  larger  bank  losses  than  the 
ones we report. 

Second,  our  computation  relies  on  contractual  maturities  of  loans 
and securities. These may differ from effective maturities, which can be 
shorter due to prepayment. This would lower the impact of rising rates 
on bank assets.10  On the other hand, rising interest rates could lower 
prepayment incentives. In this scenario, the effective maturity may in-
crease as monetary policy tightens. 

As a robustness check, we employ an alternative approach where we 
obtain pool-level MBS trading prices from TRACE and link them to loan 
maturity  structures.  Our  analysis  reveals  that  price  changes  across 
longer maturity structures do not decline as much as treasuries’  price 

10 Liquid RMBS indices are based on loan pools with shorter contractual ma-
turities than the average stated maturity of real-estate-related loans and secu-
rities on bank balance sheets, and hence we cannot use them directly to mark to 
market our assets. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038995E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2. Distribution of Change in Asset Value (“Marking to Market”). 
This figure plots the histograms (density) of the percentage of a bank’s asset value decline when assets are marked to market according to market price growth from 
Q1 2022 to Q1 2023 (Panel a), as well as bank asset value decline by bank size (Panel b). We describe the steps to calculate the mark-to-market asset values in the 
main text. The reference line in Panel (a) indicates SVB’s asset value decline. SVB’s asset value declines by 15.7 %, or $34 billion, after their assets are marked to 
market. The reference line is at 89th percentile. The 5th, 25th, median, 75th, and 95th percentiles in Panel (a) are 4 %, 6 %, 9 %, 13 %, and 19 %, respectively. In 
Panel (b), the x-axis is asset value in log terms. The size distribution of the U.S. banking industry has a fat left tail, meaning that there are many extremely small 
banks. The largest 50 banks’ asset sizes range from $58.9 billion to $3.5 trillion, while the bottom 10 percentiles have asset values less than $68 million. Log assets of 
18, 20, 22, and 24 are about $66 million, $485 million, $3.6 billion, and $26 billion, respectively. The decline at the right end starts around log asset value of 24, 
which is about $26 billion. Data sources: Bank call reports in Q1 2022 and various ETF and indices price data as described in the main text. 

changes  across  long  maturity  structures.  One  possible  reason  for  this 
phenomenon is that prepayment risk counters the effect of interest rate 
changes. However, these results should be interpreted with caution due 
to the infrequent trading of individual MBS securities and the limited 
availability of recent transaction price data. Nonetheless, employing this 
method, which relies on more conservative price declines by effectively 
assigning  shorter-than-contractual  maturity  to  real  estate  loans,  we 
ascertain that aggregate asset declines in the U.S. banking system exceed 
$1 trillion (assessed on 75 % of bank assets). Importantly, our relative 
ranking of banks based on stability measures developed in Section 4 is 
unchanged,  regardless  of  whether  we  use  our  standard  method  of 
marking-to-market  bank  assets  or  the  more  conservative  one  (see 
Figure A2 in the Appendix). 

Third, we ignore the possibility that banks may have hedged their 
interest rate exposure using financial derivatives. Granja et al. (2024) 
analyze the extent to which U.S. banks hedged their asset exposure as 
monetary policy tightened in 2022. They use call report data for interest 
rate swaps, covering close to 95 % of all bank assets, and supplement it 
with hand-collected data on broader hedging activity from 10 K and 10Q 
filings for all publicly traded banks (68 % of all bank assets). They find 
that  interest  rate  swap  use  is  concentrated  among  larger  banks  who 
hedge  a  small  amount  of  their  assets.  Overall,  only  6  % of  aggregate 
assets  in  the  U.S.  banking  system  are  hedged  by  interest  rate  swaps. 
Therefore, the use of hedging and other interest rate derivatives was not 
large enough to offset a vast majority of the loss in the value of U.S. 
banks’ assets. 

Fourth, we further verify the validity of our estimates by using the 
data on bank asset duration from a sample of banks who choose to report 
such duration collected by Granja et al. (2024). The average reported 
duration  of  4.6  years  implies  a  9.2  %  decline  in  bank  asset  values 
following  a  two-percentage-point  increase  in  the  interest  rates.11 
Applying  this  9.2  %  decline  to  the  $24-trillion  aggregate  bank  asset 
value results in the aggregate loss of value of about $2.2 trillion, which is 
very close to the $2.16 trillion estimate implied by our method. 

11  The  average  duration  is  calculated  based  on  the  sample  of  62  banks  that 
voluntarily report the duration of their total assets in their 10K and 10Q filings. 
The two-percentage-point increase in rates approximates an increase in the 5- 
and 10-year Treasury yields within our analysis period. We also verified that 
our measure of mark-to-market asset declines is positively correlated with the 
reported duration within this sample of banks. 

Finally,  we  briefly  contrast  our  estimates  with  other  studies  that 
attempted  such  calculations.  Using  a  similar  back-of-the  envelope 
duration calculation from selected banks Drechsler et al. (2023) found a 
decline in the aggregate bank asset value of $1.75 trillion, in the ballpark 
of our estimate. Flannery and Sorescu (2023) find losses in the order of 
$1.1  trillion.  They  employ  a  similar  methodology  to  ours  with  some 
notable distinctions that may account for the disparities between their 
figures and ours. It is crucial to emphasize, however, that their calcu-
lations  align  with  the  lower  end  of  our  own  estimates,  as  discussed 
above.12 

Overall, our estimates broadly align with external measures, varia-
tions  in  our  methodology,  and  different  methods.  Differences  in  esti-
mates  are  likely  attributed  to  specific  assumptions  regarding  asset 
characteristics, which are not evident in the call report data. Addition-
ally,  differences  may  arise  from  the  application  of  a  variant  of  our 
methodology  to  a  distinct  subset  of  bank  assets.  Regardless  of  the 
approach, bank asset losses are very substantial compared to their pre-
existing book capital, impacting a broad spectrum of banks. We antici-
pate  that  regulators,  equipped  with  more  granular  regulatory  data  at 
their disposal compared to call reports, can employ our methodology to 
conduct even more rigorous and nuanced assessments. 

3. The role of uninsured leverage 

3.1. Banking sector and the case of SVB 

We  next  turn  to  assessing  banks’  funding  structures  before  the 
monetary  tightening.  We  show  that  SVB  was  not  especially  thinly 
capitalized relative to other banks. Instead, we show that it stood out on 
the dimension of uninsured leverage, making it much more run-prone 
than other banks. Table A1 presents the funding structure of the U.S. 

12  There are some considerable differences between our approach with those 
of  the  authors.  First,  their  losses  are  based  on  market  value  as  of  Q4  2022 
instead  of  Q1  2023.  Second,  instead  of  marking  to  market  using  changes  in 
market prices, they obtain the fair values reported by banks in call reports for 
some  asset  categories.  For  assets  without  reported  fair  values,  they  need  to 
make  assumptions  about  loan  interest  rates  to  determine  the  cash  flow 
schedule, which are not required in our approach. Finally, they assign shorter 
maturities to loans in some maturities than we do, because we need to get the 
market prices of market indices with the corresponding maturities. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038996E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

banking  industry prior to the monetary tightening. The average bank 
funds 10 % of their assets with equity, 63 % with insured deposits, and 
27 % with uninsured debt comprising 23 % uninsured deposits and 4 % 
other debt funding.13  There was very little difference in the capitaliza-
tion  across  banks  prior  to  monetary  policy  tightening.  The  10th 
percentile best capitalized bank had a ratio of equity to assets (E/A) of 
14 %, while the 10th percentile worst capitalized bank had 8 % capital. 
Again, SVB is not an outlier—it is at the 10th percentile of capitalization 
of U.S. banks. 

SVB did stand out from other banks in its distribution of uninsured 
leverage, the ratio of uninsured debt to assets (see Jiang et al. 2020 for a 
more comprehensive analysis of uninsured leverage of the U.S. banking 
and shadow banking sectors). Banks differ significantly in the share of 
funding  they  obtain from  uninsured  sources. The  5th  percentile  bank 
uses 6 % of uninsured debt to fund its assets. For this bank, 94 % of 
funding is not run-prone to withdrawals by the uninsured depositors. 

On the other hand, the 95th percentile bank funds 52 % of its assets 
with uninsured debt. For this bank, even if only half of uninsured de-
positors panic, this leads to a withdrawal of a quarter of total marked-to- 
market value of the bank. SVB was in the 99th percentile of distribution 
in uninsured leverage. Over 78 % of its assets were funded by uninsured 
deposits. This fact suggests that uninsured deposits played a critical role 
in the failure of SVB. We formalize this insight in a simple framework 
below. 

3.2. Self-Fulfilling solvency runs, sleepy depositors, and monetary policy 

In  this  section,  we present  a  model  that illustrates  that  banks  can 
become exposed to self-fulfilling solvency runs when monetary policy 
tightens. In the current banking environment, liquid assets represent a 
significant part of bank balance sheets. This makes it difficult for runs to 
arise in a framework of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) or Goldstein and 
Pauzner  (2005),  in  which  asset  illiquidity  is  paramount.  Instead,  we 
model the existence of solvency runs, which arise even if banks’ assets 
are fully liquid. This differentiates the model from liquidity run models. 
Banks have market power in the deposit market, which allows them to 
pay  depositors  below  the  risk-free  rate  (e.g.,  see  Egan,  Matvos,  and 
Hortacsu (2017), Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017)). In return for 
banking services, depositors are willing to earn low deposit rates if they 
believe that the bank is sound. If they believe that the bank is not sound, 
on the other hand, they withdraw their deposits making the bank less 
sound. 

We call this mechanism a self-fulfilling solvency run and extend it to 
study  the  role  of  maturity  transformation:  banks  hold  long  maturity 
assets, exposing banks to asset declines due to monetary policy and fund 
themselves  with  demandable  deposits.  The  basic  mechanism  is  the 
following. When the risk-free interest rate is low, bank asset values are 
high  enough  that  they  can  survive  uninsured  depositor  withdrawals. 
Then it is not rational for any individual depositor to withdraw, and the 
bank is immune to self-fulfilling solvency runs. When interest rates rise 
sufficiently,  and  thus  asset  values  decline,  self-fulfilling  runs  are 
possible. In fact, we illustrate that bank equity values can increase as 
interest rates rise if uninsured depositors believe that banks are stable,14 
but this also exposes banks to self-fulfilling runs by the same uninsured 
depositors. We use the model to highlight the central role of uninsured 
leverage in exposing banks to self-fulfilling solvency runs in the data, 
and then use this insight to empirically study solvency run potential in 
Section 4. 

We present a simple and stylized model that takes assets, liabilities, 

13  As shown in Table A1 Panel B, only less than 1% of the uninsured deposits 
are time deposits with time to maturity and repricing in more than a year.  
14  This  finding  is  consistent  with  the  prediction  in  Drechsler,  Savov,  and 
Schnabl (2021) and Drechsler et al. (2023) that deposit franchise increases as 
interest rates rise. 

and markups of banks as exogenous to illustrate the basic mechanism of 
solvency runs and their interaction with uninsured leverage.15  This al-
lows us to generate predictions that can be taken to data. 

Setting 

A monopolist bank has long-dated assets and liabilities (deposits) in 
place. We study how the withdrawal behavior of uninsured depositors 
interacts with monetary policy and the consequences for bank stability. 

Bank assets 

A bank holds two assets normalized to a book value of 1: c shares of 
bank assets is interest-insensitive cash with a duration of 0, and (1 (cid:0) c)
shares of its assets are risk-free liquid perpetuities (e.g., T-bonds with 
infinite  maturity),  paying  an  annual  coupon r0.  Because  cash  has  a 
duration of 0, (1 (cid:0) c) effectively captures the duration of the bank’s as-
sets  and  their  sensitivity  to  interest  rate  risk.  The  perpetuities  are 
completely liquid: the bank can always sell them at their present value of 
coupons discounted at the risk-free rate. For tractability, we consider a 
given realization of risk-free rate, rf , as an absorbing state. At the risk- 
free rate rf , the market value of bank assets is given by c + (1 (cid:0) c) r0
rf

.

Deposits 

(cid:0)

)

rf

rf
)

The  bank’s  existing  liabilities  comprise  insured  and  uninsured  de-
posits with face value li  and lu, respectively. We refer  to the share of 
funding from uninsured debt, lu, as uninsured book leverage. The bank 
therefore has (book) capital eb = 1 (cid:0)
(li + lu). Existing depositors can 
keep their deposits with the bank or withdraw them to invest in outside 
goods such as a money market fund or deposits at other banks, which 
< rf . The  external  rate  increases  in  the  risk-free  rate 
earn  μ
(cid:0)
1 > μʹ
> 0. On the other hand, if the bank fails, uninsured depositors 
realize a flow cost of failure νf > 0; in other words, prevailing rates do 
not compensate uninsured depositors if they think the bank will fail for 
sure. There is no utility loss of default for insured depositors. This payoff 
structure captures the idea that depositors are willing to pay to obtain 
deposit services and want to use these services if the bank is sound, but 
uninsured depositors prefer to withdraw their funds to keeping them in 
the bank, if the bank will fail. In this setting, banks have market power in 
the  deposit  market,  which  may  give  rise  to  franchise  value  as  in 
Drechsler,  Savov,  and  Schnabl  (2017  and  2021),  Egan,  Matvos,  and 
Hortacsu (2017), and Drechsler et al. (2023).16 

To further map the model to the data, we assume that s shares of 
uninsured depositors are potentially “awake,” while (1 (cid:0) s) shares of the 
uninsured  depositors  are  “sleepy”  and  keep  the  money  in  the  bank 
irrespective of the bank’s condition. This captures the idea that perhaps 
a part of the reason why investors hold deposits is so that they (ratio-
nally or not) do not have to pay attention to banks’ health. Either way, 
depositors being sleepy makes it more difficult to sustain a self-fulfilling 
run. We also assume that all insured depositors are “sleepy.” In practice, 
some of them may also be awake and consider withdrawing their money 
following an interest rate increase. It is easy to incorporate such deposit 
outflows in our framework, and these would only increase the range of 
model parameters when a “bad” run equilibrium can occur. 

Bank failure 

In the baseline model, we assume that a bank fails when the bank is 

15  Egan,  Matvos,  and  Hortacsu  (2017)  endogenize  bank  size,  financing 
choices, and markups; Jiang et al. (2020) study the role of uninsured leverage in 
a model of banks and shadow banks. Drechsler et al. (2023) endogenize banks’ 
investment  and  financing  decisions  and  study  how  interest  rates  affect  bank 
deposit franchise and run risk.  
16  See also, among others, Hannan and Berger (1991), Neumark and Sharpe 
(1992),  Egan,  Lewellen,  and  Sunderam  (2022),  and  Wang  et  al.  (2022)  for 
evidence of bank market power in the deposit market. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038997E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

insolvent, i.e., when the market value of equity is negative in present 
value  terms.  Because  bank  default  is  initiated  by  regulators,  we  also 
consider alternative default rules when mapping the model to the data. 

Equilibria 

(cid:0)

)

We consider pure strategy symmetric equilibria of the game between 
the  depositors  and  the  bank.  Given  the  setup,  the  profit-maximizing 
pricing strategy of the bank is straightforward: it sets deposit rates at 
the  outside  option  μ
,  expropriating  the  full  depositor  surplus. 
Insured  depositors  and  sleepy  uninsured  depositors  are  passive  and 
collect their deposit rates. The focus of the analysis is on the decision of 
awake uninsured depositors. There are two equilibria: a “no-run” equi-
librium in which awake uninsured depositors do not withdraw, and a 
“run” equilibrium in which awake uninsured depositors withdraw. 

rf

The good equilibrium arises if bank fundamentals can support the 
uninsured depositors’ belief that the bank is solvent. In other words, the 
market value of equity (franchise value) if depositors do not run, eno run, 
has to be positive: 

(cid:0)

)

eno run

rf

= c + (1 (cid:0) c) r0
rf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
PV Assets

(cid:0)

)

rf
rf

μ

(cid:0) (li + lu)

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
PV Deposit

≥ 0

(1) 

To simplify notation, define the per-dollar net gain (or loss) on assets 
, and the per-dollar 

due to differences in interest rates as Δa

)

(cid:0)

= r0(cid:0) rf
rf

value  of  deposit  franchise  as  Δf

(cid:0)

)

rf

.  Then  the  market  value 

rf
= rf (cid:0) μ(rf )

rf

of a bank in the no-run equilibrium comprises its book capital, the net 
value of its assets, and the deposit franchise of all deposits: 
)

)

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
= eb + (1 (cid:0) c)Δa

rf

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Assets Gain/Loss

+

(li + lu)Δf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Deposit Franchise of Total Deposits

rf

≥ 0

eno run

rf

(2) 

The bank can survive if the deposit franchise of all depositors and 
capital exceeds losses due to interest rates. In other words, better capi-
talized banks with more deposit franchise are less prone to bank failure. 
A run equilibrium occurs if it is rational for an individual uninsured 
depositor  who  is  awake  to  withdraw  their  funds,  conditional  on 
believing other awake uninsured depositors are also withdrawing. This 
occurs when the bank’s equity value is negative if all awake depositors 
withdraw—i.e., if: 

(cid:0)

)

erun

rf

(cid:0)
= eb + (1 (cid:0) c)Δa

rf

)

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Assets Gain/Loss

(cid:0)

)

+ (li + (1 (cid:0) s)lu)Δf

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Deposit Franchise of Sleepy Deposits

rf

< 0 

With a little algebra, we can write the run condition as: 
(cid:0)

)

)

(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)
eb + (1 (cid:0) c)Δa

rf

+

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Assets Gain/Loss

(li + lu)Δf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Deposit Franchise of Total Deposits
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
eno run

rf

<

sluΔf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Deposit Franchise of Awake Deposits

rf

In other words, a run equilibrium can be supported if the value of the 
bank under the no-run condition is lower than the deposit franchise of 
runnable deposits. 

(3) 

asset valuations and a higher overall deposit franchise value. The run 
equilibrium, on the other hand, critically depends on the types of de-
posits used to fund the bank. The higher the uninsured leverage, lu, and 
more awake the depositors, s, the more runnable the bank is, especially 
)
. 
if it derives a large share of its value from the deposit franchise f
Intuitively,  banks  with  a  large  uninsured  deposit  base  can  simulta-
neously support a large bank valuation and still be susceptible to bank 
runs. We note that these insights are also consistent with Drechsler et al. 
(2023) who also provide a model showing that the bank run equilibrium 
is  more  likely  to  occur  when  the  interest  rate  is  high,  the  share  of 
uninsured deposits is high, or the uninsured deposit beta is low (their 
Proposition 3). 

rf

(cid:0)

More formally, there is a threshold: 
)
)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)
∗ = eb + (1 (cid:0) c)Δa
s

+ (li + lu)Δf
rf

rf
luΔf

rf

)

(cid:0)

(4)  

(cid:0)

)

rf

≥ 0. If s > s

such that if the share of awake depositors s is less than or equal to that, 
(cid:0)
∗
s ≤ s
+
, we are in no-run equilibrium, assuming that  eb + (1 (cid:0) c)Δa
(li + lu)Δf
, a “bad” run equilibrium becomes a possi-
∗) as a measure of bank solvency 
bility. Thus, we can think about (1 (cid:0) s
risk due to uninsured depositor runs. All else equal, this index of bank 
instability  will  be  weakly  higher  for  banks  with  higher  uninsured 
leverage. 

rf

)

∗

Monetary policy, franchise value, and bank instability 

Here we show that when interest rates rise sufficiently, and thus asset 
values decline, self-fulfilling runs are possible for banks, especially those 
with high uninsured leverage and a large share of awake depositors. We 
further  illustrate  the  conditions  under  which  bank  equity  values  can 
increase as interest rates rise if uninsured depositors believe that banks 
are stable, but that this also exposes banks to self-fulfilling runs by the 
same uninsured depositors. 

Higher interest rates make it easier to support a run equilibrium if 
interest rates increase asset losses at a faster rate than the franchise value 
of sleepy depositors—i.e., if :17 
)

)

(cid:0)
(cid:0) (1 (cid:0) c)Δaʹ

rf

(cid:0)
> (li + (1 (cid:0) s)lu)Δfʹ

rf

(5) 

In other words, banks that are most susceptible to a monetary-policy- 
induced  run  are  those  with  more  long-maturing  assets  (low  c);  high 
uninsured leverage, lu  (holding overall leverage li + lu  fixed); and more 
awake depositors (high s). 

While higher interest rates make it easier to support a run equilib-
rium,  they  can  also  lead  to  increased  bank  valuations  if  depositors 
believe that no run will take place. This situation occurs in banks when: 

(li + lu)Δf

(cid:0)

’

)

rf

> (cid:0) (1 (cid:0) c)Δa

(cid:0)

’

)

rf

> (li + (1 (cid:0)

s)lu)Δf

(cid:0)

’

)

rf

(6) 

)

rf

Consider  banks  whose  per-deposit  franchise  value  increases  in  in-

(cid:0)
terest rates fʹ
but whose deposit base comprises runnable deposits 
with high slu. Their valuations increase if depositors believe the bank is 
stable, but also become most susceptible to a deposit run if those beliefs 
change. 

Proposition 1. Combining the above expressions, the equilibrium structure 
is the following:  

Example  1. Self-fulfilling  Solvency  Bank  Runs  with  Constant  Deposit 
Markups 

1)  Unique  no-run  equilibrium  when:  eb + (1 (cid:0)

(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

)

lu)Δf

rf

≥ sluΔf

rf

)

(cid:0)
c)Δa

rf

+ (li +

2)  Multiple  equilibria  with  run  equilibrium  possible  when:  0 ≤ eb  +

(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)
(1 (cid:0) c)Δa

)

rf

+ (li + lu)Δf

rf

< sluΔf

rf

3)  Unique  equilibrium  with  bank  insolvency  when:  0  > eb  + (1 (cid:0)

(cid:0)
c)Δa

)

rf

+ (li + lu)Δf

rf

(cid:0)

)

The structure of equilibria shows, unsurprisingly, that no-run equi-
libria are more easily supported in better capitalized banks with higher 

To  better  understand  the  role  that  deposit  markups  play  in  deter-
mining  bank  stability  and  equity  valuations,  consider  the  example  of 
banks, which earn a constant markup on their deposits, so μ
m)rf . Then f

= m and the value of the deposit franchise is isolated 

= (1 (cid:0)

rf

rf

)

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

17  More  formally,  consider  a  bank  who  is  arbitrarily  close  to  a  possible  run 
(cid:0)
→0.  Then 
equilibrium:  lim
the unique no-run equilibrium will switch to multiple equilibria as the risk-free 
rate increases. 

+ (li + lu)Δf

eb + (1 (cid:0)

(cid:0)
c)Δa

sluΔf

))

rf

rf

rf

)

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038998E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

)

)

rf

rf

(cid:0)
from interest rates as fʹ
= 0. First, from condition (5), it is clear that 
rising  interest  rates  in  this  case  increase  the  support  of  bank  runs  if 
(cid:0)
Δaʹ
< 0.  They  also  lead  to  lower  equity  valuations  when  a  run  is 
absent.  This is  intuitive, since  interest rates  only operate through the 
asset valuations, which decline in interest rates. In this case as interest 
rates rise, asset values decline, decreasing bank valuations in the good 
equilibrium as well as the bad. When interest rates are sufficiently low so 
that the following condition is satisfied, only the good equilibrium ex-
ists: 

eb + (1 (cid:0) c)

)

(cid:0)

r0 (cid:0) rf
rf

+ (li + (1 (cid:0) s)lu)(1 (cid:0) m) ≥ 0 

When  rates  rise  beyond  the  threshold  rf  that  makes  the  above 
expression negative, the run equilibrium emerges, and both equilibria 
coexist. Finally, if rates are sufficiently high so that: 

eb + (1 (cid:0) c)

)

(cid:0)

r0 (cid:0) rf
rf

+ (li + lu)m < 0,

the  bank  is  fundamentally  insolvent  and  cannot  support  the  good 
equilibrium anymore. 

Example 2. Self-fulfilling Solvency Bank Runs When the Deposit Franchise 
“Hedges” the Asset Interest Rate Exposure 

We next illustrate that solvency bank runs can also happen even if the 
deposit  franchise  perfectly  “hedges”  the  bank’s  asset  interest  rate 
exposure in the absence of deposit withdrawals. The intuition behind 
this insight reflects our above discussion: a bank run by the uninsured 
depositors destroys a part of the deposit franchise value along with its 
hedging benefits, which can render a bank insolvent. 

(cid:0)

)

To illustrate this in a simple example, consider a “pass-through” bank 
(cid:0)
)
= (cid:0) Δa
. We further assume that li  +
where μ
lu = (1 (cid:0) c). Then the equity value in the case of no run is independent 
of interest rates and equal to: 

= r0, and so Δf

rf

rf

rf

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

)

eno run

rf

= c + (1 (cid:0) c) r0
rf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
PV Assets

(cid:0)

)

rf
rf

μ

(cid:0) (li + lu)

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
PV Deposit

= c + (1 (cid:0) c) r0
rf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
PV Assets

(cid:0) (1 (cid:0) c) r0
rf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
PV Deposit

= c 

In  this  case,  the  changes  in  the  value  of  a  bank’s  deposit  liability 
perfectly hedge the changes in the value of bank assets due to changes in 
interest rates. Consequently, in this case the bank is always solvent ab-
sent the deposit withdrawals, and the unique insolvency equilibrium is 
not possible. However, we can still have a case of multiple equilibria, 
with the solvency bank run being one of them, if interest rates increase 
sufficiently. Consider the case where rf  is high enough so that r0 < rf . Let 
γ = r0
,  where  lower  γ  corresponds  to  higher  rates.  Using  (4)  and 
rf
simplifying, we find that the “awake” depositors’ run threshold equals: 
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
∗ = eb + (1 (cid:0) c)Δa
s

) =

)
(cid:0)

=

rf

)

)

)

(cid:0)

rf
luΔf

+ (li + lu)Δf
rf

crf
rf (cid:0) r0

lu

eb
(cid:0)
luΔf

rf

=

c
(1 (cid:0) γ)lu

(7) 

We have several possibilities depending on the value of s

∗. First, if 
∗ ≥ 1, the bank can survive any run by the uninsured depositors. This 
s
∗ < 1, 
corresponds to the case of a unique no-run equilibrium. Second, if s
there are two possibilities. If uninsured depositors believe that share s ≤
∗
of uninsured depositors is awake, we have a unique “good” equilib-
s
rium. Alternatively, any belief by the uninsured depositors that a share s 
∗
> s
of the uninsured depositors is awake leads to multiple equilibria, 
with  a  “bad”  run  equilibrium leading  to  bank  insolvency  becoming  a 

possibility. Banks with smaller initial capitalization (lower c) and higher 
uninsured leverage (higher lu) have a smaller range of awake depositors 
supporting  a  “good”  no-run  equilibrium,  increasing  their  fragility  to 
uninsured depositor runs. 

)

Numerical Example: We illustrate this point further in a simple nu-
merical example. Consider a bank with initial value of assets equal to 
$100  billion.  The  bank  holds  $10  billion  in  cash  and  $90  billion  in 
Treasurys paying an annual coupon of 3 % before monetary tightening 
(
(so that c = 0.1). The bank has $90 billion of deposits, so that 
=
li + lu
0.9, at the “sticky” deposit cost of 3 %. The current risk-free rate is 3 %. 
Then, the market value of equity equals $10 billion. Now suppose that 
the risk-free rate unexpectedly increases by 100 basis points to 4 % (i.e.,
γ = 0.75). Note that this does not change the value of equity in the case 
of  no run  because the  decline  in the  value  of bank  assets is  perfectly 
hedged by the decline in the value of bank liabilities. As we discussed 
above,  if  the  insured  depositors  are  sticky,  the  bank’s  solvency  will 
crucially depend on the behavior of uninsured depositors. Suppose that 
the  uninsured  leverage  lu = 0.8.  We  can  now  compute  the  highest 
share  of  awake  uninsured  depositors  that  is  sustainable  in  a  unique 
=
equilibrium without a bank run. According to (7), we have s

∗ = c

(1(cid:0) γ)lu

0.1
= 0.5. Hence, any belief that up to half of uninsured depositors 
0.25 × 0.8
are awake can be sustained in a unique “good”  equilibrium without a 
bank run and insolvency. The belief that more than half of uninsured 
depositors are awake will lead to multiple equilibria, with a solvency 
bank run being one of the equilibria. 

4. Marked-to-market losses, solvency, and run risk 

Motivated  by  our  analysis  above,  we  next  more  systematically 
consider whether marking banks’ assets to market renders a share of U.S. 
banks insolvent or exposes them to run risk. There are several challenges 
that arise when assessing whether banks are insolvent and run-prone, 
even after marking assets to market. First, it is difficult to evaluate the 
market  value  of  deposit  liabilities.  On  the  one  hand,  deposits  are  on 
demand, and thus could be evaluated at their face value at prevailing 
market rates. On the other hand, there may be a positive spread between 
the  Fed  funds  rates  and  deposit  rates  due  to  banks’  market  power, 
allowing banks to earn rents (Hannan and Berger 1991; Neumark and 
Sharpe 1992; Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2017; Egan, Matvos, and 
Hortacsu 2017; Wang et al. 2022). Under this scenario, one may want to 
consider on-demand liabilities more akin to long-duration assets, which 
also lose value when rates rise (see Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2021 
and Drechsler et al. 2023). Thus, not properly accounting for the market 
value  of  deposit  liabilities  could  overestimate  the  degree  of  a  bank’s 
insolvency  risk.  In  our  model  the  bank  run  threshold  is  defined  as 
negative market value of equity in present value terms, which yields the 
following model-guided condition: 

(cid:0)

)

erun

rf

(cid:0)
= eb + (1 (cid:0) c)Δa

rf

)

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Assets Gain/Loss

(cid:0)

)

+ (li + lu)Δf

rf

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Deposit Franchise
of Total Deposits
(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

)

rf

sluΔf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Deposit Franchise
of Awake Deposits 

(cid:0)

)

According to Proposition 1, if erun

is negative, a run equilibrium 
can  be  supported.  If  one  does  not  account  for  deposit  franchise,  i.e., 
= 0, it will overestimate the range of parameters at which bank 
Δf
run can be supported. All else equal, this over-estimation will be larger 
for banks with higher deposit franchise value. 

rf

rf

We note that empirical implementation of the above condition would 
require assessing the market value of deposit liabilities, which is chal-
lenging. One way to think about calculating the franchise value is using 
“deposit betas”  (Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2021). “Deposit betas” 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038999E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

defined in good equilibrium, however, would not be the right to use in 
our  context  since  deposit  betas  could  change  dramatically  when  bad 
equilibrium is imminent. It is also unclear how run-prone different de-
positors are. For instance, Egan, Matvos, and Hortacsu (2017) estimate 
that uninsured deposits are somewhat elastic to default, but this elas-
ticity  can  result  in  multiple  equilibria.  In  other  words,  we  would  be 
assessing the franchise value of remaining deposits following a potential 
“partial”  run by depositors –  an empirical task that is inherently chal-
lenging  to  implement.  Such  complex  counterfactuals  are  beyond  the 
empirical assessments we are interested in this paper. 

Our  approach  is  instead  simpler.  Motivated  by  our  framework  in 
Section  3.2  we  develop  several  empirical  measures  of  bank  stability, 
evaluating  them  across  different  scenarios  of  uninsured  depositor 
withdrawal behaviors. First, we consider the Uninsured Deposit Coverage 
Ratio,  which  examines  whether  the  marked-to-market  value  of  bank 

4.2. Insured deposits coverage ratio and uninsured depositor runs 

We next measure banks’ susceptibility to self-fulfilling solvency runs 
across  various  scenarios  regarding  the  share  of  uninsured  depositors 
withdrawing (i.e.,  s in  the model) using bank balance sheet  data and 
their marked-to-market asset declines. A bank typically fails because the 
FDIC  steps  in  to  protect  insured  depositors  and  puts  a  bank  into 
receivership  (Granja,  Matvos,  and  Seru  2017).  Thus,  we  consider  a 
simple  empirical  solvency  condition  that  reflects  the  idea  that  insured 
depositors being potentially impaired is the lower bar for FDIC inter-
vention, although it is likely that the FDIC would intervene well before 
this scenario is reached. For that purpose, Fig. 4 plots the distribution of 
ratios of insured deposit coverage based on different uninsured deposit 
withdrawal scenarios s calculated as follows: 

Insured Deposits Coverage Ratio (s)

= Mark (cid:0)

to (cid:0) Market Assets (cid:0)

s × Uninsured Deposits (cid:0)
Insured Deposits   

Insured Deposits

assets is adequate to cover withdrawals by uninsured depositors. Sec-
ond, we analyze the Insured Deposit Coverage Ratio, which determines 
whether the remaining value of bank assets after a hypothetical with-
drawal by uninsured depositors is sufficient to cover the face value of 
insured deposits. Third, we assess the impact of withdrawals by unin-
sured  depositors  on  the  reported  bank  Capital  Ratio,  recognizing  that 
such withdrawals may necessitate the liquidation of a portion of bank 
assets at their market values, effectively leading to a decline in the eq-
uity value. Finally, we evaluate whether the marked-to-market value of 
assets is adequate to cover all non-equity liabilities (Extreme Insolvency). 
As we discuss below the assessments based on these measures implicitly 
incorporate the role of regulators, who play a central role in bank fail-
ures (Granja, Matvos, and Seru 2017). 

4.1. Are assets of U.S. banks sufficient to cover uninsured deposits? 

The  first  benchmarking  exercise  considers  the  run  incentives  of 
uninsured depositors from the perspective of assets after marking assets 
to  market.  Specifically,  we  consider  whether  the  assets  in  the  U.S. 
banking system are large enough to cover all uninsured deposits. Intu-
itively, this situation would arise if all uninsured deposits were to run, 
and the FDIC did not close the bank prior to the run ending. 

Fig.  3A  plots  the  histogram  of  uninsured  deposit  coverage  ratios 
assessing  the  ratio  of  uninsured  deposits  to  assets  and  the  ratio  of 
uninsured deposits to marked-to-market assets. Fig. 3B plots the ratio of 
uninsured deposits to assets against bank size. As we observe, while the 
decline in asset values increased the ratio of uninsured deposits to assets, 
virtually  all  banks  (barring  two)  have  enough  assets  to  cover  their 
uninsured deposit obligations. In other words, if the FDIC does not step 
in to protect the deposit insurance fund, or if the liquidation of the assets 
does  not  cause  large  enough  fire  sales,  there  may  be  no  reason  for 
uninsured depositors to run.18 

Notably, SVB has marked-to-market assets that are barely enough to 
cover its uninsured deposits. This fact can help explain why the unin-
sured depositors run may have occurred for this bank. 

18  We  note  that  the  uninsured  depositors  could  start  running  due  to  risk  of 
further asset losses even if banks currently have enough assets to cover their 
uninsured deposit obligations. 

A  negative  value  of  this  ratio  means  that  the  remaining  mark-to- 
market  asset  value—i.e.,  after  paying  s  uninsured  depositors  who 
withdraw their deposits—is not sufficient to repay the face value of all 
insured deposits. According to this metric, if such withdrawal manifests 
itself in equilibrium, and absent of other policy interventions, the bank 
will fail. 

A negative value of this measure does not imply a bank fails; it only 
diagnoses that a bank can be susceptible to a run self-fulfilling solvency 
run equilibrium if uninsured depositors’ panic. Because we do not have a 
good theory of the distribution of run sunspots, we cannot say with what 
probability such runs would occur at each bank. 

We compute this measure  across  different levels  of “awake”  unin-
sured depositors, s. Note that the data on actual bank runs are not very 
informative in this regard because regulators often intervene and resolve 
a bank before a run is complete. We start by computing our measure for 
two cases for s. In Case  1 (Fig.  4A and  4B), we assume all uninsured 
depositors run (i.e., s = 1). In Case 2 (Fig. 4C and 4D), we assume half of 
all  uninsured  depositors  run  (i.e.,  s  = 0.5).  We  compare  these  cases 
before and after Fed monetary tightening. We then present in Fig. 6 the 
sensitivity of the U.S. banking system to uninsured depositor runs for a 
range of “run” cases encompassing all possible values of s. 

A negative value of our run risk measure for a given s means that the 
solvency run on such a bank can be supported in equilibrium if a share s 
of  the  uninsured  depositors  decides  to  withdraw  their  money.  Banks 
with a positive (and fairly high) value of this measure for all s are not 
susceptible to self-fulfilling solvency runs. Our methodology identifies 
the set of banks for which solvency run risk by the uninsured depositors 
is  a  possibility,  how  this  risk  varies  with  their  share  of  “awake”  de-
positors. It also identifies a set of banks immune to such run risk. 

Our measurement shows that prior to Fed interest rate increases, U.S. 
banks were solvent under all scenarios, so no bank could experience a 
solvency run. In other words, even if all uninsured deposits had been 
withdrawn,  the  remaining  assets  would  have  been  sufficient  to  cover 
insured deposits. Of course, this assumes that deposit withdrawals do 
not result in fire sales, which would further depress assets, or that reg-
ulators do not step in earlier than we assume. But for these conditions, 
all U.S. banks would have been able to withstand all uninsured deposit 
withdrawals. 

As  discussed  above,  the  Fed  tightening  has  been  associated  with 
substantial losses in the value of banks’  long-duration assets. Our cal-
culations imply that banks are much more fragile to uninsured depositor 
runs after the tightening. Suppose that all uninsured depositors were to 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389910E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3. Distribution of Uninsured Deposit to Asset Ratio (With and Without “Marking to Market”). 
This figure plots the histograms (density) of uninsured deposit to asset ratios calculated based on Q1 2022 balance sheets and mark-to-market values using various 
ETFs and indices according to the method described in the main text (Panel a), as well as uninsured deposit ratio against bank size (Panel b). The reference lines in 
Panel (a) indicate SVB’s values. SVB’s uninsured deposit ratio is 78 % based on its Q1 2022 balance sheet, which is about $169 billion. Its uninsured deposit to mark- 
to-market asset ratio is 92 %. Both reference lines are at the 100th percentile. The 5th, 25th, median, 75th, and 95th percentiles of the mark-to-market distribution in 
Panel (a) are 6 %, 17 %, 24 %, 33 %, and 52 %, respectively. In Panel (b), the decline at the right end starts around log asset value of 24, which is about $26 billion. 
Data sources: Bank call reports in Q1 2022 and various ETF and indices price data as described in the main text. 

Fig. 4. Distribution of Insured Deposit Coverage Ratio under Different “Run” Cases. 
This figure plots the histograms (density) of the insured deposit coverage ratio calculated based on Q1 2022 balance sheets and mark-to-market values as described in 
the main text (Panels a and c), as well as these values across bank size (Panels b and d). We simulate two cases. In the first case (Panels a and b), we assume all 
uninsured depositors run and withdraw their uninsured deposits from banks (i.e., s = 1). In the second case (Panels c and d), we assume half of uninsured depositors 
withdraw their uninsured deposits from banks (i.e., s = 0.5). We remove the outliers by truncating the sample at the 98th and 1st percentiles. The 5th, 25th, median, 
75th, and 95th percentiles of the mark-to-market distribution in Panel (a) are (cid:0) 12 %, (cid:0) 2.5 %, 4 %, 11 %, and 34 %, respectively, and in Panel (b) are 1.3 %, 12.5 %, 
21  %,  36  %,  and  59  %,  respectively.  A  negative  value  of  the insured  deposit  coverage  ratio  means  that  the  remaining  mark-to-market  asset  value  after  paying 
uninsured depositors who withdraw their deposits is not enough to repay all insured deposits. Data sources: Bank call reports and various ETF and indices price data as 
described in the main text. 

withdraw funds from U.S. banks. Table 2 shows that 1619 U.S. banks 
would have negative insured deposit coverage, suggesting insured de-
posits  would  be  impaired.  Table  A2  presents  the  numbers  of  failing 
banks under this scenario for a richer set of bank size cutoffs. While the 
median bank is small, with assets of $0.3 billion, the aggregate assets of 

these banks are $4.9 trillion, and failure of these banks would involve 
$2.6 trillion of aggregate insured deposits and a shortfall for the deposit 
insurance fund of $300 billion. This would provide the FDIC with strong 
incentives to intervene during a run, such as in the case of SVB, and also 
incentivize uninsured depositors to run. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389911E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2 
Insolvent Banks Under Different Cases.   

(1) 
All Assets Liquidate 

(2) 
100 % Uninsured Depositor Run 

(3)  
50 % Uninsured Depositor Run 

Aggregate Asset 
Aggregate Equity 
Aggregate Insured Deposit 

GSIB Banks 
Total Shortfall 
GSIB Banks 

Total Asset 

Liability/Asset 

Domestic Deposit/Asset 

Insured Deposit/Asset 

Uninsured Deposit/Asset 

Equity/Asset 

Number of Banks 

11T 
1.0T 
5.2T 
3.5T 
1.5T 
1T 
0.4B 
(68B) 
91.7 
(2.3) 
89.6 
(4.9) 
66.4 
(11.6) 
22.1 
(11.7) 
8.3 
(2.3) 
2315 

4.9T 
0.4T 
2.6T 
1.5T 
0.3T 
0.2T 
0.3B 
(46B) 
91.9 
(2.3) 
90.7 
(3.1) 
67.8 
(11.4) 
22.4 
(11.8) 
8.1 
(2.3) 
1619 

0.3T 
0.02T 
0.25T 
62B 
0.01T 
4.8B 
0.2B  
(9B) 
92.0  
(3.0) 
90.8  
(3.7) 
79.7  
(5.8) 
10.2  
(7.2) 
8.0  
(3.0) 
186 

The top panel of the table shows aggregate statistics of insolvent banks as of Q1 2022. The bottom panel presents the statistics using median values of all the banks in 
each category as defined below as of Q1 2022. Numbers in parentheses in the bottom panel are standard deviations. Insolvency is defined based on mark-to-market 
asset values under four different cases as of Q1 2023. In Column (1), we assume all assets are liquidated at their mark-to-market value. The bank is considered insolvent 
if the mark-to-market value of assets is insufficient to cover all non-equity liabilities. In Column (2) we assume all uninsured depositors run. The bank under this case is 
considered insolvent if the mark-to-market value of assets—after paying all uninsured depositors—is insufficient to repay all insured deposits. In Column (3) we assume 
half of the uninsured depositors run. The bank under this case is considered insolvent if the mark-to-market value of assets—after paying half of the uninsured 
depositors—is insufficient to repay all insured deposits. Aggregate asset shows the sum of total assets of banks in each category as of Q1 2022. Aggregate equity shows 
the sum of equity of banks in each category as of Q1 2022. Aggregate insured deposit is the sum of total insured deposits of banks in each category as of Q1 2022. Total 
shortfall is the sum of total uncovered insured deposits as of Q1 2022. Systemically important banks (GSIB banks) are classified according to bank regulators’ definition 
as of Q1 2022. We also assign GSIB status to U.S. chartered banks affiliated with holding companies that are classified as GSIB. Data sources: Bank call reports in Q1 
2022 and ETF and indices price data. 

The  case  under  which  all  uninsured  depositors  run  is  likely  too 
extreme,  although  not  impossible  once  the  news  of  a  run  spreads,  as 
illustrated in our stylized framework in Section 3.2. Therefore, in Case 2, 
we consider  whether banks can withstand half of  their uninsured de-
positors withdrawing funds. Again, this scenario assumes that banks can 
liquidate  their  assets  at  market  prices,  rather  than  facing  a  fire  sale 
discount. We find that there are 186 banks with assets of about $300 
billion that have a negative insured deposits coverage ratio (Tables 2 
and A2). In other words, for these banks comprising about $250 billion 
of  insured  deposits,  even  insured  deposits  would  be  impaired  absent 
regulatory  intervention  (e.g.,  by  the  FDIC).  The  losses  to  the  deposit 
insurance  fund  would  total  approximately  $10  billion.  If  the  FDIC 
resolved these banks following a run, there would be no funds left for the 
remaining  uninsured  depositors.  In  other  words,  the  decision  to  run 
would  have  been  a  rational  one.  Therefore,  our  calculations  suggest 
these banks are certainly at a potential risk of a run, absent other gov-
ernment intervention or recapitalization. 

To further measure the vulnerability of the U.S. banking system to 
solvency runs, we plot the universe of all banks that become insolvent if 
all  uninsured  depositors  run  in  Fig.  5.  Because  of  the  caveats  in  our 
analysis,  as  well  as  the  potential  of  exacerbating  their  situation,  we 
anonymize their names, but also plot SVB as a comparison. We plot their 
mark-to-market asset losses (y-axis) against their uninsured deposits as a 
share of marked-to-market assets. Some of these banks have low unin-
sured deposits but large losses, but the majority of these banks have over 
50 % of their assets funding with uninsured deposits. SVB stands out 
towards the top right corner, with both large losses and large uninsured 
deposits  funding.  Indeed,  smaller  banks—with  assets  below  $5  bil-
lion—are more likely to be insolvent (Table A2). But the risk of run does 

not only apply to smaller banks. As Fig. 5 shows, out of the 10 largest 
insolvent  banks  (red  bubbles),  1  has  assets  above  $1  trillion,  3  have 
assets between $200 billion and $1 trillion, 3 have assets between $100 
billion and $200 billion, and the remaining 3 have assets between $50 
billion and $100 billion. 

We conclude by plotting the sensitivity of the U.S. banking system to 
solvency runs for a broader range of “run” cases, i.e., across a full range 
of awake depositor share s. Fig. 6 presents the number of insolvent banks 
(Fig. 6A) and their aggregate assets (Fig. 6B) for 10 cases ranging from 
10 % to 100 % of uninsured deposits being withdrawn at each bank. The 
bank is considered insolvent when its insured deposits coverage ratio is 
negative. Even if only 10 % of uninsured depositors decided to withdraw 
their money, 66 banks with about $210 billion of assets would fail. If 30 
%  of  uninsured  depositors  ran  instead,  which  is  close  to  the  share  of 
withdrawals just preceding the shutdown of SVB, 106 banks accounting 
for $250 billion of assets would fail. 

4.3. Bank capital ratio and uninsured depositor runs 

We next consider another empirical solvency condition that centers 
on  the  bank’s  reported  equity  capital.  This  condition  reflects  the 
perspective that reaching a negative value of book equity serves as the 
minimum threshold for regulatory intervention, although it is probable 
that regulators would intervene well before this scenario occurs. In this 
context  withdrawals  by  uninsured  depositors  force  banks  to  sell  a 
portion of their assets at their market values, potentially leading to a 
decline in the equity value. 

We construct this measure as follows: 

Capital Ratio (s) =

Book Equity (cid:0)

s × Uninsured Deposits ×

Book Asset
MTM Asset

(cid:0) 1

(

)

Book Asset   

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389912E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 5. Full Set of Insolvent Banks if All Uninsured Depositors Run (Insured Deposit Coverage Ratio Metric). 
This figure plots the full set of “insolvent” banks. A bank is considered insolvent if the mark-to-market value of its assets—after paying all uninsured depositors—is 
less than the face value of all insured deposits. On the y-axis we plot mark-to-market losses as a percentage of initial bank asset value. On the x-axis we plot uninsured 
deposits as a percentage of mark-to-market bank asset value. The assets are based on bank call reports as of Q1 2022, and banks with larger asset size are marked with 
bigger dots. Banks in the top right corner, where SVB is, have the most severe asset losses and the largest runnable uninsured deposits to mark-to-market assets. The 
red dots correspond to the 10 largest insolvent banks. Out of these, one has assets above $1 trillion, three have assets above $200 billion (but less than $1 trillion), 
three have assets above $100 billion (but less than $200 billion), and the remaining three have assets greater than $50 billion (but less than $100 billion). We also 
show SVB (assets of $218 billion in the plot). Data sources: Bank call reports and various ETF and indices price data as described in the main text. 

where MTM Asset is the market value of assets. When the book value of 
= 1, uninsured deposit with-
assets equals their market value, Book Asset
MTM Asset
> 1, 
drawals do not affect the book value of equity. But when Book Asset
MTM Asset 
uninsured deposit withdrawals will reduce the reported book value of 
equity, as satisfying each dollar of withdrawal requires liquidating more 
than  one  dollar  of  the  bank’s  book  assets.19  A  negative  value  of  the 
capital after a given withdrawal “s” indicates that the remaining book 
value  of  bank  assets  is  less  than  the  remaining  face  value  of  its  non- 
equity  liabilities.  In  this  scenario,  and  in  the  absence  of  other  policy 
interventions, the bank will fail. 

Fig.  7  presents  the  number  of  insolvent  banks  (Fig.  7A)  and  their 
aggregate  assets  (Fig.  7B)  based  on  the  above  capital  ratio  stability 
metric  for  different  run  scenarios.  As  before,  we  consider  10  cases 
ranging from 10 % to 100 % of uninsured deposits being withdrawn at 
each  bank.  A  bank  is  considered  insolvent  if  its  capital  ratio  turns 
negative  after  a  given  withdrawal  by  the  uninsured  depositors.  We 
observe  that  between  dozens  to  more  than  a  hundred  banks  could 
potentially  fail  based  on  this  measure,  depending  on  the  withdrawal 
scenario,  with  aggregate  assets  ranging  up  to  $1.4  trillion.  Notably, 
under this measure, the SVB would fail if 50 % of uninsured depositors 
decide to withdraw, and First Republic would fail at a 70 % withdrawal 
threshold. 

Overall, our calculations, utilizing both the insured deposit coverage 
ratio  and  the  capital  ratio  financial  stability  measures,  indicate  that 
without regulatory intervention, the risk of self-fulfilling solvency runs 
has been present among dozens to hundreds of U.S. banks, depending on 

19  We  assume  that  banks  liquidate  their  assets  in  equal  proportion  to  meet 
deposit withdrawals. A more refined version of this financial stability measure 
could consider the pecking order of liquidations. 

the proportion of uninsured depositors contemplating fund withdrawals. 

4.4. Extreme insolvency: no deposit franchise 

Finally, we also consider an extreme case under which we compute 
the solvency of banks by assessing whether the marked-to-market value 
of assets is sufficient to cover all non-equity liabilities. In other words, if 
all  depositors  and  debtholders  withdrew  their  funding  today,  could 
banks repay their debts? 

(cid:0)

)

rf

In the context of our model in Section 3.2, this is akin to assuming 
that there is no value to banks’ deposit franchise and assessing the sol-
= 0. We assume that when assets are 
vency condition (3) with Δf
liquidated, there is no additional discount due to liquidation, so assets 
can  be  sold  at  their  current  market  value.  This  scenario  is  extreme, 
because insured depositors have no incentives to withdraw funds as a 
function of default risk. On the other hand, it is a useful benchmark to 
better understand the de facto capitalization of the U.S. banking sector. 
Implicitly,  this  calculation  assumes  that  rising  interest  rates  do  not 
decrease the value of bank liabilities—i.e., the Fed funds rate instanta-
neously pass-through to deposit rates. 

We present these results in an Appendix, which plots the histograms 
(density)  of  the  equity-to-asset  ratio  as  of  Q1  2022  and  the  mark-to- 
market  equity-to-asset  ratio  as  of  Q1  2023  (Figure  A3,  Panel  A),  as 
well as these values by bank size (Figure A3, Panel B). The reference 
lines in Panel A indicate SVB’s equity-to-asset ratio as of Q1 2022 and its 
mark-to-market equity-to-asset ratio. As we observe, prior to the recent 
asset declines, all U.S. banks had positive bank capitalization. However, 
after the recent decrease in value of bank assets, 2315 banks accounting 
for $11 trillion of aggregate assets have negative capitalization relative 
to the face value of all their non-equity liabilities (see Table 2, Column 
1). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389913E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 6. Insolvent Banks under Different Uninsured Deposits Runs Cases (Insured Deposit Coverage Ratio Metric). 
This figure presents the number of insolvent banks (Panel a) and their aggregate assets (Panel b) associated with a given uninsured deposits withdrawal case. We 
consider 10 cases ranging from 10 % to 100 % of uninsured deposits being withdrawn at each bank. The bank is considered insolvent if its mark-to-market value of 
assets—after paying a given share of the uninsured depositors—is insufficient to repay all insured deposits. Sources: Bank call reports and various ETF and indices 
price data as described in the main text. 

5. Model discussion, empirical robustness, and extensions 

In  this  section  we  discuss  several  extensions  of  our  modelling 
framework and empirical analysis that could guide future research in 
this area. 

5.1. Model discussion and potential extensions 

We presented a simple and stylized model in Section 3.2, which takes 
assets, liabilities, and markups of banks as exogenous to illustrate the 
basic  mechanism  of  interest  rate  changes  on  solvency  runs  and  their 
interaction with uninsured leverage. Here, we briefly discuss the limi-
tations of our model, and some avenues for extensions. 

5.1.1. Endogenous asset and liability structure 

Our  model  takes  bank  assets  and  liability  structure  as  given.  Our 
analysis determines, given the initial asset and liability position of the 
bank, whether a self-fulfilling solvency run can be supported for a given 

bank. Endogenizing the asset and bank capital structure is an important 
avenue for future research, especially when considering the effects of 
polices and regulations that can interact with the asset and liability side 
of banks. 

For instance, on the asset side, banks’ choice of maturity or interest 
rate risk could account for expected bank fragility. A bank may choose 
less  maturity  mismatch  if  it  has  more  uninsured  or  flighty  deposits. 
Drechsler et al. (2023) and Haddad et al. (2023) underscore the diffi-
culty  of  choosing  the  correct  amount  of  hedging  in  the  presence  of 
self-fulfilling solvency runs. 

Similarly, on the liability side, one can also endogenize banks’ choice 
of insured and uninsured deposit mix. This could occur by setting rates 
on both types of deposits (Egan, Matvos, and Hortacsu, 2017), or more 
explicitly as a choice of uninsured leverage (Jiang et al. 2020). Both of 
those papers do not account for  maturity transformation on the asset 
side and interest rate risk that is of interest in our model. Future work 
could combine our analysis of bank fragility in response to interest rate 
shocks with such endogenous models of bank capital structure. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389914E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 7. Insolvent Banks under Different Uninsured Deposits Runs Cases (Capital Ratio Metric). 
This figure presents the number of insolvent banks (Panel a) and their aggregate assets (Panel b) associated with a given uninsured deposits withdrawal case. We 
consider 10 cases ranging from 10 % to 100 % of uninsured deposits being withdrawn at each bank. The bank is considered insolvent if its book value of equity after 
paying a given share of the uninsured depositors is negative. Sources: Bank call reports and various ETF and indices price data as described in the main text. 

Finally, critical to franchise models of bank value, we treat markups 
on deposits as exogenous function of interest rate (see Egan, Matvos, and 
Hortacsu  2017,  Xiao  2020,  or  Wang  et  al.  2022  for  endogenous 
markups). Future research could provide a deeper understanding of the 
economic  factors  influencing  the  value  of  deposit  franchise  and  its 
equilibrium evolution across different states of the world. 

5.1.2. Endogenizing the share of “Awake” depositors 

A share of awake depositors s is an important aspect of our analysis 
that we take as given. Our model as well as measurement exercise de-
termines  whether  self-fulfilling  solvency  runs  can  be  supported  for  a 
given bank for any s, given the initial asset position of the bank and a 
given raise in interest rates. Both exercises are valid even if s is endog-
enous. On the other hand, a specific theory of why depositors are asleep, 
i.e., an endogenous s would further refine the set of banks at risk of self- 
fulfilling  solvency  runs  by  specifying  a  unique  parameter  s  for  each 
bank. 

We also assume that all insured depositors are “sleepy.” In practice, 
as we discussed in Section 3.2, they may also be awake and consider 
withdrawing  their  money  following  an  interest  rate  increase  at  other 
banks or could result in insured deposit run-ins as in Egan, Matvos, and 

Hortacsu  (2017).  It  is  easy  to  incorporate  such  deposit  inflows  and 
outflows in our framework. 

Future work could endogenize s and improve its measurement in the 
data for both uninsured and insured depositors. We think it is an open 
debate as to what drives changes in s. It could be declines in asset values 
directly; a depositor awakens when the bank is in trouble. It could be 
rational inattention, where raising rates combined with switching costs 
can make some depositors become effectively awake, or it could even be 
sunspots. Endogenizing s is important for the assessment of the effects of 
future polices and regulations. 

The natural place to endogenize s in our model would be with respect 
to  either  the  value  of  assets  (which  fluctuate  with  the  risk-free  rate), 
markups (which fluctuate with the risk-free rate), or the risk-free rate 
directly. For example, depositors “wake up” when banks are closer to the 
potential  for  default  (assets),  when  rates  are  high,  or  when  they  are 
earning much less than they otherwise would. In most of these cases, this 
would boil down to households waking up more when risk-free rates rise 
(cid:0)
so that sʹ
> 0. The least clear-cut case is markups, which can a priori 
either increase or decrease with interest rates. From this discussion, it is 
quickly clear that while s is endogenous, the predictions of the model 
with  respect  to  endogenous  s  hold  up  when  guiding  empirical  work. 

rf

)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389915E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

However, the endogeneity of s leads to stronger elasticity of the possi-
bility of runs with respect to monetary policy. While this is an interesting 
reinforcement mechanism, we do not think it is central to our paper. 

Overall, although beyond the scope of our paper, we think this is a 
very interesting question that deserves full attention. There are already 
some examples of such emerging work, including Cookson et al. (2023), 
who provide evidence that social media could have increased the speed 
of  deposit  withdrawals  during  the  SVB  run,  and  Koont,  Santos,  and 
Zingales (2023), who find that following rate increases, deposits flow 
out faster and the cost of deposits increases more in banks with a digital 
platform. 

5.1.3. Strategic interactions, credit market equilibrium, and policy 
interventions 

We  model  one  bank,  holding  the  responses  of  the  other  financial 
market participants (banks, shadow banks, and regulators) as implicitly 
fixed. Our model therefore omits strategic interactions and spillovers by 
holding  interest  rate risk  and  markups  fixed.  Egan,  Matvos,  and  Hor-
tacsu (2017) show that deposits flow from endogenously weak to strong 
banks, making it difficult for the entire banking system to fail at once. A 
similar intuition may apply when interest rates rise. Further, our model 
does not account for the interaction between banks and shadow banks, 
which is analyzed in Buchak et al. (2018) and (2022), Jiang et al. (2020), 
and Xiao (2020). Because shadow banks are subject to maturity risk, are 
not funded with deposits but may themselves depend on bank funding 
(Jiang  2023),  how  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  intermediation 
system changes with interest rate policy remains an open question. 

Our analysis also does not consider the impact of various stabiliza-
tion measures that were implemented following the advent of the run on 
SVB.  In  this  regard,  our  conceptual  framework  and  methodology, 
designed to identify banks at risk of self-fulfilling solvency runs, have the 
potential to inform and guide interventions, both presently and in the 
future. Future work could analyze the interaction of various polices and 
regulations with respect to the bank self-fulfilling solvency run risk we 
focused on in our paper. For example, Drechsler et al. (2023) analyze 
how a lender of last resort can eliminate the run equilibrium ex post but 
as they note a richer model is needed to capture the moral hazard or 
adverse selection effects of such interventions. Importantly, such anal-
ysis should consider the industrial organization of the financial inter-
mediation market and its impact on overall credit market equilibrium 
that  goes  well  beyond  the  traditional  bank  balance  sheet  model  of 
intermediation (Buchak et al. 2022 and 2023). 

More broadly, we take monetary policy as given, based on the idea of 
the  separation  between  price  stability  goals  which  are  achieved  with 
interest rate policy and financial stability goals which are the goal of 
prudential regulation. But if the banking system becomes too unstable as 
the policy rate rises, it may limit the ability of monetary authorities to 
increase rates. 

5.1.4. Dynamics 

Our  model  is  static.  Introducing  dynamics  into  the  model  opens 
interesting avenues for exploration, which our current model ignores. 
For example, see Haddad et al. (2023) who study how switching costs 
and  horizontal  differentiation  can  endogenously  generate  deposit 
stickiness and mark-ups. One important aspect left out of our model is 
the expected route of policy rates. In other words, if interest rates are 
expected to increase in the future, then a run may start at a lower in-
terest rate threshold. Dynamics also alter potential regulatory and equity 
holder responses. For example, regulators may put constraints on policy 
tightening  if  they  expect  a  run  to  occur  at  a  certain  interest  rate 
threshold,  endogenously  changing  run  incentives.  Similarly,  equity 
holders may choose to recapitalize the bank early or late depending on 
the expected path of policy and regulatory responses (see Egan, Matvos, 
and Hortacsu 2017 for endogenous recapitalization). 

5.2. Empirical robustness and extensions 

In our empirical analysis we have not considered the impact of in-
terest  rate  hedging  by  banks  and  the  potential  credit  losses  in  our 
measurement of risk of self-fulfilling solvency runs. In this section we 
discuss the robustness of our findings to these factors and discuss ave-
nues for extending our analysis to encompass them. 

5.2.1.

Interest rate hedging 

Up to this point, we have not formally considered the possibility that 
banks may have hedged their interest rate exposure. However, this does 
not imply that the aggregate losses in the banking system we quantify 
are any less relevant for financial stability. Suppose that most banks had 
hedges covering their interest risk exposure. In that case, an important 
question arises as to who provided these hedges as a counterparty. If the 
hedges were provided by other banks, this would not alter the aggregate 
losses  but  merely  reallocate  them  across  banks.  Given  that  all  banks 
were thinly capitalized prior to the rate increase, with an average equity- 
to-asset ratio of about 10 %, the overall impact and big picture remain 
largely  unchanged.20  Alternatively,  if  the  counterparty  entities  were 
non-bank institutions that insured the U.S. banking system’s aggregate 
interest  rate  risk,  we  would  likely  witness  severe  stress  in  such  in-
stitutions  at  this  point,  as  seen  with  AIG’s  systemic  risk  exposure  in 
2007. 

As  we  discussed  in  Section  2.3,  Granja  et  al.  (2024)  analyze  the 
extent to which U.S. banks hedge and find that interest rate swap use is 
concentrated among larger banks who hedge a small amount of their 
assets. Overall, only 6 % of aggregate assets in the U.S. banking system 
are hedged by interest rate swaps. This analysis implies that the use of 
hedging  and  other  interest  rate  derivatives  was  not  large  enough  to 
offset  a  vast  majority  of  the  loss  in  the  value  of  U.S.  banks’  assets. 
Moreover,  they  find  that  banks  with  the  most  fragile  funding  like 
SVB—i.e., those with highest uninsured leverage—if anything sold or 
reduced  their  hedges  during  the  monetary  tightening.21  This  allowed 
them to record accounting profits but exposed them to further rate in-
creases. Granja et al. (2024) also find that banks with lower capital ra-
tios,  higher  shares  of  run-prone  uninsured  depositors,  and  whose 
portfolios were more exposed to interest rate risk were more likely to 
reclassify securities into hold-to-maturity during 2021 and 2022. These 
actions are reminiscent of asset substitution and book value risk man-
agement: if interest rates had decreased, equity would have reaped the 
profits, but if rates increased or remain elevated, then debtors and the 
FDIC  would  absorb  most  of  the  bank  losses  in  the  case  of  the  run. 
Consistent with these findings, McPhail et al. (2023) show that interest 
rate swap positions are not economically significant in hedging the in-
terest rate risk of bank assets. Future work could further examine bank 
risk management behavior with respect to their interest rate exposure, 
with implications for regulation. 

5.2.2.

Impact of potential credit losses 

In our analysis so far, we abstracted away from a potential impact of 
credit losses on bank stability. In Jiang et al. (2023), we further adapt 
our empirical framework to incorporate the additional effects of credit 
risk on the solvency of U.S. banks in the rising interest rate environment. 
We focus on bank commercial real estate loans for a couple of reasons. 
First, CRE loans constitute a substantial share of assets for a typical bank, 
accounting for about a quarter of assets for an average bank and $2.7 
trillion of bank assets in the aggregate. Second, CRE is also seen as a 
potential source of adverse credit events in the near term, especially the 
office sector (e.g., see Gupta et al. 2022). We find that a 10 % (or 20 %) 

20  As  shown  in  Table  A1,  the  aggregate  equity  in  the  banking  system  was 
about $2.3 trillion in Q1 2022.  
21  SVB hedged about 12% of all securities at the end of 2021. By the end of 
2022, they hedged only 0.4%. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389916E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

default rate on CRE loans—a range close to what one saw in the Great 
Recession on the lower end—would result in about $80 billion (or $160 
billion)  of  additional  bank  losses.  While  these  losses  are  an  order  of 
magnitude smaller than the decline in bank asset values associated with 
a  recent  rise  of  interest  rates,  they  can  induce  a  sizeable  number  of 
mainly smaller regional banks joining the ranks of banks at risk of sol-
vency runs. This is because large asset declines due to monetary tight-
ening have made banks less resilient to adverse credit events, further 
contributing to the fragility of the banking system. 

These estimates could be a lower bound for potential effects of credit 
distress in the US banking system. First, since we only focus on com-
mercial real estate loans and do not include other adverse effects on the 
economy. As the regional banking institutions play an important role in 
lending to local businesses, their distress could lead to a credit crunch 
with adverse effects on the real economy. We abstract away from such 
spillover effects that could amplify losses we have computed. Second, 
and  importantly,  the  news  about  commercial  real  estate  default  and 
banking losses could be a trigger for a widespread run on the banking 
system by uninsured depositors, unraveling a fragile equilibrium in the 
banking system. Future work in this area could expand further on our 
analysis  by  jointly  modeling  the  interaction  of  interest  rate  risk  and 
various aspects of credit risk on bank stability. 

6. Events after the SVB collapse 

We now discuss several events that followed the collapse of SVB bank 
in  March  2023.  We  summarize  these  briefly  in  this  section.  In  con-
ducting this assessment, it is important to remember that our framework 
and model generate multiple equilibria. Thus, we can at most say which 
equilibria can and cannot be supported. Because we do not have a good 
theory of the distribution of sunspots, we cannot say with what proba-
bility such runs would occur at each bank. In other words, our frame-
work and results are not inconsistent with runs occurring only among a 
subset of banks that we identify to be at risk. In addition, our analysis 
does  not  consider  the  impact  of  recent  policy  interventions  in  the 
banking system because it is limited to the pre-policy intervention stage. 
On May 1, 2023, the FDIC announced that First Republic had been 
closed and sold to JPMorgan Chase, becoming the third bank to fail in 
2023 following the SVB collapse and closure of Signature Bank on March 
12, 2023. All three banks have similar characteristics to the banks at risk 
we identify: significant decline in the value of their assets and high share 
of funding coming from the uninsured depositors.22 In addition, several 
other banks like Pacific West suffered large declines in their share prices, 
putting  them  at  the  brink  of  bankruptcy,  with  SPDR  S&P  regional 
banking  ETF  declining  by  more  than  40  %  between  March  and  May 
2023.  In  line  with  our  analysis,  these  events  indicate  that  financial 
stability  risk  we  focus  on  is  not  an  isolated  phenomenon  to  SVB  and 
affects a significant set of other banks. On the other hand, it important to 
acknowledge that only a few banks have failed during the recent mon-
etary tightening (as of Q1:2024). 

Our  analysis  does  not  consider  the  impact  of  various  stabilization 
measures  that  were  implemented  following  the  advent  of  the  run  on 
SVB. Notably, on March 12, the Federal Reserve created the Bank Term 
Funding Program, an emergency lending program providing loans of up 
to  1  year  in  length  to  banks,  which  effectively  allowed  the  banks  to 
borrow more than the current value of their assets. More central to our 
analysis  was  the  U.S.  Treasury  rescue  of  all  uninsured  depositors  of 
failed banks, and the possibility of future uninsured depositor bailouts 
by Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen. This and other interventions may 
have short-circuited a broader bank run that, as our analysis indicates, 
could involve many banks. 

22  As of Q4 2022, SVB had 93% uninsured leverage, Signature Bank had 88%, 
and First Republic had 71%. 

7. Conclusion 

We provide a conceptual framework and an empirical methodology 
to analyze all U.S. banks’  exposure to raising interest rates and unin-
sured  depositors  runs,  with  implications  for  financial  stability.  We 
illustrate that interest rate increases can lead to self-fulfilling solvency 
bank runs even when banks’ assets are fully liquid. Banks with high asset 
losses,  low  capital,  and,  critically,  high  uninsured  leverage  are  most 
fragile. By focusing on monetary tightening that started in Q1 2022, we 
show  that  by  March  2023  the  U.S.  banking  system’s  market  value  of 
assets declined by about $2 trillion relative to what is suggested by the 
book value of assets. We show that these losses, combined with a large 
share of uninsured deposits at some U.S. banks, can impair their stability 
and  result  in  self-fulfilling  solvency  runs.  Our  estimates  based  on  the 
financial  stability  measures  we  developed  suggest  that  absent  inter-
vention between dozens and hundreds of U.S. banks would have been at 
risk of the solvency runs depending on the share of uninsured depositors 
that decide to withdraw their funds. Overall, our analysis suggests that 
recent  declines  in  bank  asset  value  increased  the  fragility  of  the  U.S. 
banking system to uninsured depositor runs. 

Our work has important implications for financial stability, regula-
tion, and monetary policy pass-through. First, our analysis suggests that 
U.S. banks have significant asset exposure to higher interest rates that 
can lead to solvency bank runs by the uninsured depositors. Second, this 
fragility of the banking system to higher rates can significantly constrain 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  adversely  affecting  its  price  stability 
objectives. Third, our work has implications for several short-run and 
longer-term regulatory responses to address the financial fragility risk 
we focus on. 

In the near term, the creation of the Bank Term Funding Program in 
March  2023  together  with  potential  blanket  guarantee  of  uninsured 
deposits and other responses to the recent banking vulnerabilities may 
have put a pause on the crisis and reduced the risk of acute deposit runs 
across the banking system. However, many of these polices—largely to 
stem liquidity shortages—do not address the fundamental self-fulfilling 
solvency  run  risk,  which  our  analysis  indicates  could  involve  a  non- 
trivial  set  of  banks.  To  address  this  risk,  a  near-term  response  could 
involve a recapitalization of the U.S. banking system (see DeMarzo et al. 
2023). 

In the longer term, one regulatory response to the crisis could involve 
increased oversight of the U.S. banking system. In this regard, regulators 
could adopt our methodology and financial stability measures to stress- 
test  the  banking  system  for  the  scenario  of  higher  interest  rates,  ac-
counting for both the composition of bank assets and their liabilities and 
to measure the risk of self-fulfilling solvency risk. The regulators could 
also consider expanding even more complex banking regulation on how 
banks account for mark-to-market losses. However, such rules and reg-
ulations, implemented by myriad regulators with overlapping jurisdic-
tions, might not consistently address the  core issue at hand (Agarwal 
et  al.  2014).23  Alternatively,  banks  could  face  stricter  capital  re-
quirements, which would bring their capital ratios closer to less regu-
lated  lenders  that  retain  more  than  twice  as  much  capital  buffers,  as 
documented in Jiang et al. (2020). Discussions of this nature remind us 
of the heated debate that occurred after the 2007 financial crisis, which 
many might argue did not result in sufficient progress on bank capital 
requirements (see Admati et al. 2013, 2018; and Admati and Hellwig 

23 In  addition,  such  regulations  might  have  implications  for  non-bank  in-
stitutions (shadow banks), which provide several services like banks and have 
gained  market  share  that  partly  reflects  the  regulatory  actions  on  banks  (see 
Buchak et al. 2018 and 2022). These institutions are predominantly financed 
with short-term uninsured debt, but they are also significantly better capitalized 
than banks on average (Jiang et al. 2020). See also Greenwood et al. (2017), 
Corbae and D’Erasmo (2021), Begenau and Landgvoit (2022), and Wang et al. 
(2022) for recent studies of the impact of regulatory policies on banks. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389917E.X. Jiang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

2014). They also resonate well with historical studies on the impact of 
deposit  insurance  on  banks’  risk-taking  behavior  (see  Calomiris  and 
Jaremski 2019). 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Erica Xuewei Jiang: . Gregor Matvos: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Soft-
ware,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation, 
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tomasz Piskorski: 
Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization, 
Validation,  Supervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project  administration, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization.  Amit  Seru:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original 
draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Software,  Resources, 
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal  analysis, 
Data curation, Conceptualization. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

Replication Code and Pseudo Dataset for "Monetary Tightening and 
U.S.  Bank  Fragility  in  2023:  Mark-to-Market  Losses  and  Uninsured 
Depositor Runs?" (Original data) (Mendeley Data) 

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103899. 

References 

Admati, A., P. DeMarzo, M. Hellwig, and P. Pfleiderer, 2013, “Fallacies, irrelevant facts, 
and myths in the discussion of capital regulation: why bank equity is not socially 
expensive,” working paper. 

Admati, A., Hellwig, M., 2014. Bankers New Clothes: What’s wrong With Banking and 

What to Do About It? Princeton University Press. 

Admati, A., DeMarzo, P., Hellwig, M., Pfleiderer, P., 2018. The leverage rachet effect. 

J. Finan. 73, 145–198. 

Agarwal, S., Lucca, D., Seru, A., Trebbi, F., 2014. Inconsistent regulators: evidence from 

banking. Quart. J. Econ. 129, 889–938. 

Atkeson, A.G., d’Avernas, A., Eisfeldt, A.L., Weill, P.-O., 2018. Government guarantees 

and the valuation of American banks. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 

Begenau, J., M. Piazessi, and M. Schneider, 2015, “Banks’ risk exposures,” working 

paper. 

Begenau, J., and E. Stafford, 2019, “Do banks have an edge,” working paper. 
Begenau, J., Landgvoit, T., 2022. Financial regulation in a quantitative model of the 

modern banking system. Rev. Econ. Stud. 89, 1748–1784. 

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and 

the rise of shadow banks. J. Finan. Econ 130, 453–483. 

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2022. Beyond the balance sheet model of 
banking: implications for bank regulation and monetary policy. forthcoming in the 
J. Polit. Econ. 

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2023. Aggregate lending and modern 
financial intermediation: why bank balance sheet models are miscalibrated. 
forthcoming in the NBER Macroecon. Annu. 

Calomiris, C.W., Jaremski, M., 2019. Stealing Deposits: deposit Insurance, Risk-Taking, 
and the Removal of Market Discipline in Early 20th-Century Banks. J. Finan. 74, 
711–754. 

Chen, Q., I. Goldstein, Z. Huang, R. Vashishtha, 2020, “Liquidity transformation and the 

fragility in the US banking system,” working paper. 

Cookson, J.A., C. Fox, J. Gil-Bazo, J.F. Imbet, and C.M. Schiller, 2023, “Social media as a 

bank run catalyst,” working paper. 

Corbae, D., D’Erasmo, P., 2021. Capital buffers in a quantitative model of banking 

industry dynamics. Econometrica 89, 2975–3023. 

DeMarzo, P., E. Jiang, A. Krishnamurthy, G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru, 2023, 

“Resolving the banking crisis,” policy proposal. 

Diamond, D.W., Dybvig, P.H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. J. Polit. 

Econ. 91, 401–419. 

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2017. The deposits channel of monetary policy. 

Quart. J. Econ. 132, 1819–1876. 

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2021. Banking on deposits: maturity transformation 

without interest rate risk. J. Finan. 76, 1091–1143. 

Drechsler, I., A. Savov, P. Schnabl, and O. Wang, 2023, “Banking on uninsured deposits,” 

working paper. 

Egan, M., Matvos, G., Hortacsu, A., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility: 

evidence from the US banking sector. Am. Econ. Rev. 107, 169–216. 

Egan, M., Lewellen, S., Sunderam, A., 2022. The Cross-Section of Bank Value. Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 35, 2101–2143. 

Flannery, M.J., and S.M. Sorescu, 2023, “Partial effects of fed tightening on U.S. banks’ 

capital”, working paper. 

Goldstein, I., Pauzner, A., 2005. Demand–deposit contracts and the probability of bank 

runs. J. Finan. 60, 1293–1327. 

Granja, J., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2017. Selling Failed Banks. J. Finan. 72, 1723–1784. 
Granja, J., Jiang, E., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru, 2024, “Book value risk 

management of banks: limited hedging, HTM accounting, and rising interest rates”, 
NBER working paper. 

Greenwood, R., Stein, J.C., Hanson, S.G., Sunderam, A., 2017. Strengthening and 

streamlining bank capital regulation. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act 479–565. 

Gupta, A., V. Mittal, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2022, “Work from home and the office 

real estate apocalypse,” NBER working paper. 

Haddad, V., B. Hartman-Glaser, and T. Muir, 2023, “Bank fragility when depositors are 

the asset,” working paper. 

Hannan, T.H., Berger, A.N., 1991. The rigidity of prices: evidence from the banking 

industry. Am. Econ. Rev. 81, 938–945. 

Jiang, E., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru, 2020, “Banking without deposits: 

evidence from shadow bank call reports,” NBER working paper. 

Jiang, E., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru, 2023, “Monetary tightening, commercial 

real estate distress, and US bank fragility,” NBER working paper. 

Jiang, E., 2023. Financing competitors: shadow banks’ funding and mortgage market 

competition. Rev. Financ Stud 36, 3861–3905. 

Kelly, B., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2016. Too-systemic-to-fail: what option 
markets imply about sector-wide government guarantees. Am. Econ. Rev. 106, 
1278–1319. 

Koont, N., T. Santos, and L. Zingales, 2023, “Destabilizing digital ‘bank walks’,” working 

paper. 

McPhail, L., P. Schnabl, and B. Tuckman, 2023, “Do banks hedge using interest rate 

swaps,” working paper. 

Neumark, D., Sharpe, S.A., 1992. Market structure and the nature of price rigidity: 

evidence from the market for consumer deposits. Quart. J. Econom. 107, 657–680. 
Wang, Y., Whited, T.M., Wu, Y., Xiao, K., 2022. Bank market power and monetary policy 
transmission: evidence from a structural estimation. J. Finan. 77, 2093–2141. 
Xiao, K., 2020. Monetary transmission through Shadow Banks. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 

2379–2420. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389918