Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The short-termism trap: Catering to informed investors with limited
horizons✩
James Dow a, Jungsuk Han b, Francesco Sangiorgi c,∗
a London Business School, Regent’s Park, London, NW14SA, United Kingdom
b Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 08826, Republic of Korea
c Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, Adickesallee 32-34, 60322, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Does the stock market exert short-term pressure on listed firms, do they respond, and is this response value
reducing? We show that limited investor horizons indeed have those consequences, as follows. First, informa-
tive stock prices increase firm value; in our model, they reduce the agency cost of incentivizing managers.
Second, short project maturity improves stock price informativeness by catering to informed investors with
short horizons. Third, since informed trading capital is a scarce resource, attracting informed investors cannot
increase an individual firm’s price informativeness in equilibrium: it simply destroys shareholder value. This
‘‘short-termism trap’’ can potentially destroy up to 100% of the benefits of stock market listing.

Dataset link: ‘‘The Short-Termism Trap: Caterin
g to Informed Investors with Limited Horizons (
Supplementary Data and Code)’’ (Original data
)

JEL classification:
G14
G32
G38

Keywords:
Informational externality
Price informativeness
Myopia
Agency cost
Managerial compensation
Race to the bottom

1. Introduction

Informative stock prices improve firm value. For example, stock
prices can improve managerial contracting (the channel modeled in this
paper) or other contracts, guide investment decisions, enable access
to finance, and improve governance via activism or acquisitions. So,
firms can benefit from going public and having their stock traded by
well-informed traders. But traders prefer their positions to make money
sooner rather than later: they have short horizons. Under pressure
from investor short-termism, firms can make their stock prices more
informative by choosing short-term projects that cater to informed
traders. However, firms’ competition for informed capital can backfire:

project choices that are optimal for individual firms can encourage a
race to the bottom in which firms all choose projects of excessively
short duration. We show that this effect can even be so severe that it
destroys 100% of the benefits of going public.

Previous research has established reasons why investors have short
horizons (we refer here to hedge funds, pension funds, proprietary
traders or any investors that trade based on their own analysis).1
In our model they may need to liquidate early. Dow et al. (2021)
show that investor short-termism emerges endogenously because of
capital constraints. More generally, investors may need to demonstrate
performance in the short term, they may be subject to margin calls
if their trades do not converge, and cost of carry makes long-term

✩

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank the editor and the (anonymous) referee for very helpful comments. We also thank Vikas
Agarwal, Laurent Bach, Alvin Chen, Niklas Ekvall, Julian Franks, Mariassunta Giannetti, Denis Gromb, Alexander Guembel, Andrey Malenko, Konstantin Milbradt,
Christopher Hennessy, Lin Shen, Günter Strobl, Xavier Vives, and Johan Walden for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at BI
Norwegian Business School, INSEAD, KAIST, London Business School, Stockholm School of Economics, Tilburg University, University of Vienna, Brevan Howard
FTG conference, EFA conference, and WFA conference. Han is grateful for the support from the Management Research Institute and the Institute of Finance and
Banking at Seoul National University. An earlier version of this paper has been circulated under the title ‘‘Stock market efficiency and corporate short-termism’’.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

jdow@london.edu (J. Dow), jungsuk.han@snu.ac.kr (J. Han), F.Sangiorgi@fs.de (F. Sangiorgi).

1 See, for example, Graves and Waddock (1990), Porter (1992), Bushee (1998), Manconi et al. (2012), Cella et al. (2013), Kim et al. (2017), and Von Beschwitz

et al. (2022) for relevant discussions and evidence on investor short-termism.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103884
Received 9 October 2022; Received in revised form 28 May 2024; Accepted 29 May 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)103884Availableonline14June20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).J. Dow et al.

arbitrage uneconomic. Thus, firms whose projects’ value is revealed
sooner are more attractive to informed investors.

There is also an extensive literature on corporate short-termism.
Our paper is different: we do not just demonstrate that firms will
take decisions that deliver short-term results by compromising long-
term value. Such decisions, after all, are completely natural in contexts
where an agent’s performance is monitored periodically, and are in
general value-creating outcomes given the underlying agency prob-
lem. In other words short-term decisions are the equilibrium decisions
given a constrained optimal solution to standard formulations of the
managerial agency problem. In contrast, in our paper short-termism is
dysfunctional because firms’ competition (through project selection) for
informed trade creates an externality on other firms. Also, our paper
features short-termism in the context of publicly-traded companies
and stock-based managerial compensation. This is important because
much of the public debate on short-termism centres on alleged short-
term pressure from the stock market and on stock-based managerial
compensation.

To briefly illustrate our point about optimality, consider as an
example a firm owner who appoints a manager. If the owner cannot
observe managerial effort, it makes sense to sanction the manager if
performance targets are not met. Obviously, the manager has an incen-
tive to choose actions that meet the targets by their deadlines, even if
other actions are higher NPV but take longer to show positive results.
In that sense, the manager is subject to ‘short-termist’ pressure from the
owner. From the owner’s perspective, however, imposing performance
targets is optimal, even though it distorts managerial decisions. It is
second best, i.e., optimal given the information constraint. It is well
established in previous literature that short-termism can be second-
best (see the literature section of our paper for details). What is less
well established, but more important economically, is that there are
economic forces causing short-termism to be suboptimal compared to
second-best. In this paper, we explain these forces.

We study a model in which firms’ shares are traded in a stock market
with privately informed investors and uninformed investors. Informed
investors have limited capital, modeled by assuming they can only
invest one unit. They also have a preference for short-term investments,
modeled by assuming they may receive a liquidity shock forcing them
to liquidate early. Firms choose projects which are run by managers
who are subject to moral hazard. Managers may also need to leave
early for exogenous reasons. Stock-based compensation allows firms to
implement long-term projects because the stock price in the short term
reflects information about the projects’ eventual liquidation value.

A firm can make compensation contracts more efficient if it can
increase the informativeness of its stock price. Given the project choices
made by other firms, an individual firm can do this by reducing its
project maturity to attract informed trade. However, informed trading
is limited, so the increase in one firm’s price informativeness is at the
expense of other firms. This externality causes a race to the bottom
in which, in equilibrium, project maturity is too short: all firms would
have higher value if they coordinated on longer projects. Indeed, in
equilibrium, projects may be even shorter duration than if there were
no stock-based managerial incentives at all. The race to the bottom in
project maturity, and the ensuing loss of value, is what we call the
‘‘short-termism trap’’.

At a high level, our central premise is that informative stock prices
are useful to firms. Therefore, firms are under pressure to compete
for informed investors, and because informed investors are myopic,
firms do this by choosing short-term projects. We model the managerial
compensation channel because public debate on short-termism often
includes criticism of stock-based managerial incentives. Moreover, mar-
ket monitoring offers significant value to listed firms. Markets can
monitor managers by paying close attention to press conferences, earn-
ings announcements, and financial statements and by conducting their
own independent analysis, making share price information a valuable

tool for improving managerial incentives.2 Nevertheless, our analysis is
more general in the sense that the short-termism trap can equally arise
when informative stock prices add value through other channels, such
as managerial learning about project productivity from stock prices.

How quantitatively important is the short-termism trap? Previous
literature has established that efficient stock prices add value, which,
in our paper, occurs through reducing the cost of the agency problem
(the managerial incentive channel). This cost can be large; in general it
is much larger than the cost of managerial compensation.3 In our model
the managerial agency problem is turbocharged by the externality in
project duration to lead to potentially very large value destruction. We
benchmark firm value to the value without a stock market listing and
show that the short-termism trap can be so severe that in equilibrium,
some firms choose to remain private, while those that choose to list are
subject to so much investor pressure that excessively short-term project
choice offsets all the value of an informative share price.4 In other
words, while stock market listings can potentially create substantial
value through price informativeness, up to 100% of this value can be
dissipated by the short-termism trap when investors have sufficiently
short horizons (the going-private value creates a floor to firm value,
since any firm can opt out of the stock market).

Shocks to the financial system, such as financial crises, can exac-
erbate investor myopia and hence create substantial value loss. Long-
lived investors with limited capital behave as if they have short hori-
zons because of the opportunity cost of holding existing trading po-
sitions for long periods instead of reusing capital on new positions
(Dow, Han, and Sangiorgi, 2021). This opportunity cost is higher when
a shock reduces price efficiency so that trading positions take longer
to become profitable. Therefore, shocks that originate in the financial
market will, through the short-termism trap, transmit to inefficient
real investment. Since Dow et al. (2021) also show that a transitory
shock can have long-term effects on efficiency and investor horizons,
it follows that via the short-termism trap, the post-financial crisis
economy will perform less well than before.

The short-termism trap does not depend on managerial myopia. The
cause is investor myopia, but our model also includes the possibility
of managerial myopia to allow us to give a richer set of results when
comparing project duration to relevant benchmarks. Because investor
myopia is the underlying cause of the problem, any collective or regula-
tory scheme to lengthen managerial horizons (e.g., lengthening option
vesting periods) may mitigate, but cannot eliminate the short-termism
trap.

We provide several extensions and comparative statics of our model.
First, an increase in the number of firms leads to shorter-duration
projects because the competition for informed investor capital is more
intense. Second, the impact of the agency problem (managers’ horizons
and cost of effort) is amplified by the externality in project duration.
Third, we study the impact of investor horizon. The short-termism trap
can be eased when all informed investors exhibit long-term horizons,
but this is not the case when investor horizons are diverse. Suppose
there are enough investors who never liquidate early. In that case,

2 There is extensive theoretical literature on the value of market monitor-
ing, pioneered by Holmstrom and Tirole (1993) and discussed in the survey
by Bond et al. (2012).

3 CEO pay is typically small compared to firm value. However, the cost of
inducing the manager to take the action that is taken in equilibrium is not
a proxy for the cost of the agency problem, except in simple cases such as a
binary effort choice by the agent; see Grossman and Hart (1983). In general,
the agent’s action taken is not the first-best action because that is too expensive
or impossible to implement with incentives, so the agency cost of management
may be much higher than CEO pay (Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1991).

4 Of course, in the real world, stock market listings may have other benefits
in addition to providing an informative market price (such as adherence to
strict disclosure rules). Our point is that the short-termism trap can destroy
up to 100% of the value of having a market price.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038842J. Dow et al.

corporate short-termism is lessened via a clientele equilibrium, where
(ex-ante identical) firms divide into two groups: those that opt for short-
term projects and attract short-term investors, and those that select
long-term projects, thereby drawing long-term investors. By contrast, if
long-term investors are below a critical mass, they have no impact on
equilibrium short-termism at all. Fourth, a salary cap, often proposed
as a mechanism to improve the management of listed companies, may
promote short-termism rather than prevent it.

Our baseline model assumes that the value of information is in-
dependent of project maturity, but this can be generalized. On the
investor side, for example, long-term projects may be more uncertain,
so that learning their value could be more valuable. On the firm
side, long-term performance metrics may be less informative about
managerial effort due to confounding events over the project’s lifespan.
We explore the impact of some of these effects. Varying the maturity-
dependent value of information can either lengthen or shorten project
maturity, but there remains an externality in project horizon choice.

Finally, our model also provides some testable empirical predic-
tions. There is ample empirical evidence that stock-based compensation
can lead to value-destroying short-termism even though stock prices
can improve managerial incentives because they reflect the present
value of long-term future cash flows.5 Our analysis shows that in-
formational externalities in financial markets can change the relation
between stock-based compensation and corporate short-termism, and
offers several testable implications based on this mechanism.

The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we connect our
paper to the existing literature. In Section 3, we describe the model
setup. In Section 4, we solve for the financial market equilibrium given
firms’ maturity choices and we solve each firms’ optimal managerial
compensation and choice of project maturities taking other firms’ be-
havior as given. In Section 5, we describe the equilibrium concept,
show existence and uniqueness of equilibrium and we characterize its
properties. In Section 6 we study the impact of long-term investors. In
Section 7, we study further empirical and policy implications of our
model. Section 8 concludes.

2. Literature

There is a large literature on short-termism. This literature identifies
two main possible sources of short-termism. First, short-termism could
arise because shareholders have short horizons, and want to maximize
the share price at the end of their horizon, rather than the value of
projects that mature later. This may lead them to encourage managers
to choose projects that deliver value quickly, rather than better projects
that do not demonstrate their superior value until later.6 Second, short-
termism could arise when managers themselves have short horizons (or
higher discount rates) and act in their own interests. If managers own
stock or are compensated with a mix of stock and salary, they have
an incentive to choose projects that deliver value quickly, rather than
better long-term projects (Stein, 1989).7 In those papers, managerial
incentives may not be optimally designed. However, similar outcomes

5 See, for example, Bergstresser and Philippon (2006), Gopalan et al.

(2014), Asker et al. (2015), and Brochet et al. (2015).

6 Porter (1992) argues that companies pursue short-term share price ap-
preciation at the expense of the long-term performance due to the pressure
from shareholders’ short-term interests. For example, Bushee (1998) finds that
high ownership by short-horizon investors induces firms’ myopic investment.
Gaspar et al. (2005) find that firms with short-term shareholders tend to get
lower premiums in acquisition bids. Cremers et al. (2020) also find that an
increase in ownership by short-horizon investors has an incremental effect on
corporate short-termism such as reducing R&D expenses.

7 For example, empirical evidence shows that shorter CEO horizons reduce
investment and lower firm value where horizons are measured by expected
tenure (Antia et al., 2010), financial reporting frequency (Kraft et al., 2018),
and option vesting periods (Ladika and Sautner, 2020).

can arise when incentives for managers are designed optimally in
response to contracting frictions (Edmans et al., 2012; Varas, 2018).
In that case, corporate short-termism is second-best given those con-
tracting constraints.8 For example, it is easy to see that in many agency
problems, optimal incentive schemes will include performance targets
and deadlines, specified by the principal, such that the agent must
achieve the targets by the deadlines (i.e. failure to do so results in a
lower, or even negative, payment to the agent). Such schemes skew
the agents choices to achieve short-term performance at the expense of
long-term value, but this distortion is by definition optimal given the
incentive compatibility constraints of the agency problem. There is no
reason to consider this an undesirable outcome, indeed the contrary is
true.

Related papers include Bolton et al. (2006) who show that manage-
rial short-termism persists when shareholders optimally induce man-
agers to chase short-term profits to exploit market over-optimism.
In Edmans (2009), blockholders’ trading on private information causes
prices to reflect fundamentals, encouraging managers to invest in valu-
able long-run projects rather than chasing short-term profits. Thakor
(2021) finds that greater noise in performance assessment with long-
horizon projects leads to higher agency costs and thus induces a pref-
erence for short-termism.

In almost all of this literature on ‘‘short termism’’, however, there is
no welfare analysis demonstrating that stock market short-termism is
value-reducing. On the contrary, in those papers that permit a welfare
analysis, short-termism is second best. There are, however, three ex-
ceptions: three papers demonstrate welfare suboptimal short-termism,
although via different channels from the stock market. First, Milbradt
and Oehmke (2015) study debt financing when long-term projects are
more likely to default. In response, firms may shorten project maturity
even at the cost of further increasing default risk, initiating a race to the
bottom in which firms choose projects of shorter maturities compared
to first-best. Second, in Thanassoulis (2013), firms may be willing to
tolerate lower value short-term projects in order to reduce the cost of
compensating impatient managers. Third, and relatedly, Chemla et al.
(2022) study a model where competition among firms to hire managers
leads to inefficient overcompensation, and furthermore compensation
becomes extremely short due to managerial impatience. Our paper
differs from these three papers because we study the role of the stock
market in generating inefficiency.

Our paper is also related to the literature on real investment under
information asymmetries. Generally, prices in all markets in the econ-
omy serve to influence economic decisions, but literature in finance has
specifically focused on the feedback effect between an individual firm’s
investment and its own stock price (e.g., Dow and Rahi, 2003; Bond
et al., 2012; Goldstein et al., 2013; Sockin and Xiong, 2015). While
producing private information is helpful in guiding investment, the
incentives to produce private information are not necessarily optimal.
More informative prices may also either help or hinder the allocation
of risk (Dow and Rahi, 2003). The market has a strong incentive to
concentrate on predicting the payoffs of ‘‘no-brainer’’ projects that are
so profitable they will surely be invested in, so the predictions have no
social value (Dow et al., 2017). By contrast, our paper studies the real
impact of competing firms with endogenous managerial contracting.9

8 This is obvious, in the sense that in any model with just a principal and

an agent, the optimal contract is by definition second best.

9 There are several papers exploring the role of competition with real
investment in rather different contexts. In Fishman and Hagerty (1989) prices
are useful in improving investment policy so shareholders know they will be
able to sell at informative prices, inducing excessive information disclosure as
firms’ compete for investor attention. Peress (2010) argues that monopolists
have more informative prices because their stock prices are sensitive to
information, while in competitive industries profits are so low anyway that
there are only weak incentives to produce information. Foucault and Frésard

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038843J. Dow et al.

There is a stand of literature following the seminal paper by Holm-
strom and Tirole (1993), that studies the effect of stock prices in
motivating managers in a model of trading on private information
(e.g., Baiman and Verrecchia, 1995; Dow and Gorton, 1997; Kang
and Liu, 2010; Strobl, 2014; Lin et al., 2019; Piccolo, 2022). For
example, Strobl (2014) shows that shareholders may have an incentive
to encourage ‘‘overinvestment’’ (in the first-best sense) in order to make
the stock price more informative and improve the managerial agency
problem. In Dow and Gorton (1997), prices combine the two roles
of guiding investment and motivating managers. In Piccolo (2022),
managers choose long- or short-term projects, and the market produces
information about the same kind of project; this can lead to multiple
equilibria. These papers show the benefits of stock-based compensation.
In our paper, we also use an agency framework. Project maturity choice
is a key variable, unlike the aforementioned papers, and crucially, we
also study the effects of competition among firms for informed trading.
This results in socially sub-optimal short-termism, even though each
firm’s managerial contract and project choice are individually optimal.
In other words if there were only one firm in our model, short-termism
would be prevented by stock-based compensation. Our model shows
that this result is reversed under competition for investors.

3. Setup

Consider a three-period economy (𝑡 = 0, 1, 2) with a corporate sector
and a financial market. The corporate sector consists of firms with
a productive technology. Their shares trade in the stock market. The
risk-free rate in the economy is normalized to zero.

3.1. Firms

Each firm has risk-neutral shareholders and a risk-averse manager.
Initially, we suppose there is a fixed number of listed firms; later, we
will endogenize this. Shares of listed firms are traded in the stock
market as described in Section 3.2.

There are a total of 𝑀 firms indexed by 𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑀, of which a
subset of 𝑁 firms indexed by 𝑛 ∈  are listed. Shareholders of firm 𝑛
choose the maturity of its project, 𝜏𝑛 ∈ [0, 1], where the project matures
early (𝑡 = 1) with probability 1 − 𝜏𝑛, and late (𝑡 = 2) with probability
𝜏𝑛.10 So if 𝜏𝑛 = 0 the project always matures early, while if 𝜏𝑛 = 1 it
always matures late.

When the project matures it generates a payoff which is distributed

as a liquidating dividend, given by
𝑉 𝑛 ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝑅𝑛 where
{ 𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝛼𝟏𝑙)

𝑅𝑛 =

0

if the project is successful
otherwise

,

(1)

where 𝛥𝑉 > 0, 𝛼 ≥ 0, and 𝟏𝑙 is an indicator function that equals
one if the project pays off late and is equal to zero if the project
pays off early. The first component 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) is maturity-sensitive and the
second component 𝑅𝑛 is sensitive to managerial effort (and also to
project maturity when 𝛼 > 0). We assume that output rises with longer

(2019) argue that firms have an incentive to piggyback on information that is
produced about other firms, and this induces them to prefer making products
that are not differentiated. In Xiong and Jiang (2022), disclosing managerial
compensation contracts induces myopic overinvestment.

10 Project maturity choices are observable, so it makes no difference whether
it is shareholders or the manager that choose 𝜏𝑛. In Appendix I we consider
the case where the choice of 𝜏𝑛 is private information. In this scenario, share-
holders offer an incentive compatible compensation contract that specifies the
maturity 𝜏𝑛. The main qualitative property of the optimal contract, i.e., that
shareholders’ wage bill is increasing in 𝜏𝑛, is robust to this extension.

maturity: 𝑓 (⋅) is non-negative, increasing, concave, twice-differentiable
with 𝑓 ′(0) = ∞ and 𝑓 ′(1) = 0.11

When 𝛼 > 0, also the volatility of the output increases with project
maturity. We initially set 𝛼 = 0 for convenience and discuss the
role of this parameter in Section 5.5. Essentially, an 𝛼 > 0 increases
the informational advantage of investors with private signals about
long-term projects, thereby dampening informed investors’ short-term
incentives.

Firms choose 𝜏𝑛’s simultaneously. Once all firms make their matu-

rity choices, those choices become publicly observable.

We assume that with probability 𝛿 ∈ [0, 1] each manager exits the
economy early (𝑡 = 1); this includes the special case 𝛿 = 0 where
managers are long-lived. Managers have limited liability and an outside
option which we normalize to zero for simplicity. Managers’ effort
choice is private information. We denote by 𝑒𝑛 the effort level of firm
𝑛’s manager which is either 𝐻 (“high effort”) or 𝐿 (“low effort”). Given
effort 𝑒𝑛, the project succeeds with probability 𝜌(𝑒𝑛), and fails with
probability 1−𝜌(𝑒𝑛). Success is independent across firms. If the manager
exerts high effort, the project is more likely to succeed:

𝜌(𝑒𝑛) =

{ 𝜌𝐻
𝜌𝐿

if 𝑒𝑛 = 𝐻
if 𝑒𝑛 = 𝐿

,

where 𝛥𝜌 ≡ 𝜌𝐻 −𝜌𝐿 > 0. The manager’s utility given wage 𝑤𝑛 and effort
choice 𝑒𝑛 is

𝑢 (𝑤𝑛) − 𝟏(𝑒𝑛 = 𝐻)𝐾,

where 𝐾 is the manager’s effort cost, and 𝑢 is an increasing, concave,
twice continuously-differentiable function with 𝑢(0) = 0. We further
assume that 𝑢′(0) = ∞ and lim𝑤→∞ 𝑢(𝑤) = ∞ to ensure a unique and
interior solution.12 We restrict the parameter value of 𝐾 to be less than
the upper bound ̄𝐾 ≡ 𝛥𝜎𝑢
where the parameter 𝜎𝐻 is defined
in the next subsection.13

( 𝛥𝜌𝛥𝑉
𝜎𝐻

)

Shareholder value of firm 𝑛 is given by

𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑤𝑛.

(2)

Shareholders are long-lived and maximize expected shareholder value
by choosing whether to be listed, which project to invest in, and which
contract to give to the manager. The cost of incentivizing managers, 𝑤𝑛,
is borne by shareholders. In contrast, we refer to 𝑉 𝑛 as ‘‘production’’
or ‘‘final payoff’’. When we refer to ‘‘efficiency’’, we mean with respect
to expected shareholder value, henceforth shareholder value for short.

3.2. The financial market

In the financial market, participants trade shares of listed firms. The
shares of firm 𝑛 ∈  are claims on the firm’s final payoff 𝑉 𝑛 when it
realizes. There is no constraint on short sales. There are three types of
participants: informed traders, noise traders and market makers.

There is a unit mass of risk-neutral informed investors who either
consume early (𝑡 = 1), with probability 𝛾 or late (𝑡 = 2), with probability
1 − 𝛾. We denote by  the set of informed investors in the economy.

11 Throughout the paper, we use the terms ‘‘increasing’’ as synonymous
with ‘‘strictly increasing’’, and ‘‘concave’’ (or ‘‘convex’’) as synonymous with
‘‘strictly concave’’ (or ‘‘strictly convex’’). The assumption that 𝑓 ′(0) = ∞ means
the marginal benefit of lengthening maturity is infinity for an extremely short-
term project (i.e., 𝜏 𝑛 = 0). The assumption that 𝑓 ′(1) = 0 means that the
marginal benefit of lengthening maturity 𝜏𝑛 is zero when it is an extremely
long-term project (i.e., 𝜏 𝑛 = 1). Concavity together with these two assumptions
is assumed for simplicity to ensure a unique interior solution.

12 The assumption that 𝑢′(0) = ∞ rules out a corner solution where no
compensation is given to managers even when good information arrives. The
assumption that lim𝑤→∞ 𝑢(𝑤) = ∞ prevents the situation where it is impossible
to incentivize managers because their effort cost 𝐾 is too high.

13 If the effort cost is higher than ̄𝐾, all firms will choose to implement low

effort. See the proof of Theorem 1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038844J. Dow et al.

Each informed investor can produce private information about one firm
in the initial period, 𝑡 = 0. All the informed investors who investigate
firm 𝑛 ∈  receive an identical signal 𝑠𝑛, which is either good (𝐺)
or bad (𝐵). High managerial effort results in a higher probability
that informed investors receive a good signal. We denote by 𝜎𝑒 the
probability that the signal is good given effort 𝑒 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿}; the signal is
≡ 𝑝𝑟 (𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺 |𝑒𝑛 = 𝐻 ) given high effort, and
good with probability 𝜎𝐻
𝜎𝐿

≡ 𝑝𝑟 (𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺 |𝑒𝑛 = 𝐿 ) given low effort where 𝛥𝜎 ≡ 𝜎𝐻 − 𝜎𝐿 > 0.
We denote by 𝜈𝐺 and 𝜈𝐵 the posterior probability of a high payoff
conditioning on a good and a bad signal, respectively. For simplicity,
we assume that the signal is a sufficient statistic for the final payoff.14
Equivalently, we assume

𝜌𝐻 = 𝜎𝐻 𝜈𝐺 + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )𝜈𝐵;

𝜌𝐿 = 𝜎𝐿𝜈𝐺 + (1 − 𝜎𝐿)𝜈𝐵.

(3)

There are long-lived, competitive, risk-neutral market makers who
set prices to clear the market given aggregate order flows from in-
formed investors and noise traders as in the standard Kyle (1985)
model.

The noise traders trade for exogenous reasons such as liquidity
needs. As in the case of informed investors, noise traders also consume
early or late (with probability 𝛾 and 1 − 𝛾, respectively). We denote
𝑖 (𝑡) the market order of informed investor 𝑖 in stock 𝑛 ∈  at
𝑥𝑛
time 𝑡 = 0, 1. In the initial period, 𝑡 = 0, noise traders submit order
flow 𝑧𝑛 in aggregate for each stock 𝑛, which follow an i.i.d. uniform
distribution on [− ̄𝑧, ̄𝑧]. The parameter ̄𝑧 captures the intensity of noise
in the financial market. Next period, at 𝑡 = 1, those who got liquidity
shocks (i.e., 𝛾 fraction) reverse their orders. Consequently, they submit
−𝛾𝑧𝑛 for each stock 𝑛 at 𝑡 = 1.

In each period (𝑡 = 0, 1) market makers observe aggregate order flow

for each stock 𝑛 ∈  such that

𝑋𝑛(𝑡) = ∫

𝑖∈

𝑖 (𝑡)𝑑𝑖 + 𝑍𝑛(𝑡),
𝑥𝑛

where 𝑍𝑛(0) = 𝑧𝑛 and 𝑍𝑛(1) = −𝛾𝑧𝑛.

In our model, informed trading is a scarce resource in the econ-
omy.15 To this end, we make the following assumptions. First, we
assume that 𝑀 ̄𝑧 (the total noise trading intensity) is greater than one
(the maximum possible size of the informed investors’ total order flow).
This ensures that the given mass of informed investors cannot fully
reveal the signal for every firm.16

Second, we assume that each informed investor can hold at most one
unit of one stock (either a long or short position).17 Informed investor
𝑖 in firm 𝑛 ∈  can submit a market order 𝑥𝑛
𝑖 (0) ∈ {−1, 0, 1} at 𝑡 = 0.

14 More formally, 𝑠𝑛 is a sufficient statistic for (𝑠𝑛, 𝑅𝑛) if the posterior
distribution of 𝑒𝑛 conditional on (𝑠𝑛, 𝑅𝑛) only depends on 𝑠𝑛; see, for example,
Chapter 9 in DeGroot (1970). The conditions in Eq. (3) are equivalent to
𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛

|𝑠𝑛) because

𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛

|𝑠𝑛, 𝑒𝑛) = 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛
|𝑒𝑛) =

∑

𝑠𝑛∈{𝐺,𝐵}

𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛

|𝑠𝑛, 𝑒𝑛)𝑃 𝑟(𝑠𝑛

|𝑒𝑛) =

∑

𝑠𝑛∈{𝐺,𝐵}

𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛

|𝑠𝑛)𝑃 𝑟(𝑠𝑛

|𝑒𝑛).

|𝑠𝑛) is in turn
Then, it is immediate that the condition 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛
equivalent to the condition that 𝑠𝑛 is a sufficient statistic because Bayes’ Rule
implies

|𝑠𝑛, 𝑒𝑛) = 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛

𝑃 𝑟(𝑒𝑛

|𝑠𝑛, 𝑅𝑛) =

𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛

|𝑠𝑛, 𝑒𝑛)𝑃 𝑟(𝑒𝑛
𝑃 𝑟(𝑅𝑛

|𝑠𝑛)

|𝑠𝑛)

= 𝑃 𝑟(𝑒𝑛

|𝑠𝑛).

The sufficient statistic assumption in agency theory is introduced in Holmstrom
(1979) or Shavell (1979); for a textbook discussion with discrete signals
see Tirole (2006).

15 While we assume the number of informed traders to be fixed, our main
results would go through if the supply of informed trade were elastic, but not
perfectly elastic, as discussed in Section 5.

16 If 𝑀 ̄𝑧 is small relative to the mass of informed investors, the economy

trivially degenerates to one with fully-revealing prices for every firm.

17 Because informed investors are risk-neutral, they will choose the maxi-
mum amount of trading even though they are allowed to trade less than one
unit.

If 𝑥𝑛
𝑖 (0) ∈ {−1, 1} and firm 𝑛 liquidates late, informed investor 𝑖 can
reverse their position in 𝑡 = 1, or, if they consume late, hold it until
𝑡 = 2. If 𝑥𝑛
𝑖 (0) = 0 and firm 𝑛 liquidates late and informed investor 𝑖
consumes late, they can submit an order 𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (1) ∈ {−1, 0, 1} at 𝑡 = 1.

In addition, we assume that

̄𝑧 <

1
𝛾(𝑀 − 1)

,

(4)

which ensures that the ratio of noise per unit of informed investors is
sufficiently small that for each listed firm, there are enough informed
investors that some of them will choose its stock so that it will have
positive price informativeness, regardless of other firms’ choices (see
the proof of Proposition 1). Furthermore, we assume that
( 1
̄𝑧

(1 − 𝛾) ≥ 1,

− 1

(5)

)

which is a sufficient condition for establishing that listed firms’ matu-
rity choices are strategic complements (see Proposition 4).18

Finally, we assume that all exogenous random variables in our

model are jointly independent.

4. Optimal choice

4.1. Investor trades and stock prices

In this subsection, we derive price informativeness of stocks in the
financial market by solving informed investors’ and market makers’
problems. For this, we assume that all managers of listed firms exert
effort. In equilibrium, this is true, as firms whose managers exert low
effort have nothing to gain from listing.19

Because market makers are competitive and risk neutral, the price
of each security is its expected liquidation value conditional on market
makers’ information: the price of stock 𝑛 ∈  in each period (𝑡 = 0, 1)
is given by
[
𝑉 𝑛|
|
|

𝑃 𝑛(𝑡) = E

]
 (𝑡)

(6)

,

where  (𝑡) is the market makers’ information in period 𝑡.

Prices are either fully-revealing or non-revealing due to the as-
sumption of uniformly-distributed noise trading. The reason, in brief,
is as follows—see, for example, Dow et al. (2021) for a more detailed
discussion. If the order flow is large enough (in absolute value, whether
buy or sell) then it must imply that both informed investors and noise
traders traded in the same direction, so it is fully revealing. But if the
absolute value of order flow is smaller than the threshold value at
which full revelation occurs, then it could have resulted from either
informed investors buying and noise traders selling, or vice versa.
Because noise trading is uniformly distributed, any level of the order
flow is equally likely regardless of whether arbitrageurs are buying or
selling, so it is completely non-revealing.
𝐺 and 𝑃 𝑛
𝐵 to be the fully-revealing price for good or bad
signal, respectively. We also denote 𝑃 𝑛
to be the non-revealing price.
∅
We denote 𝜆𝑛 to be the probability of information revelation for stock
𝑛, which we refer to as the price informativeness of stock 𝑛.

We denote 𝑃 𝑛

We can now show the following result:

If 𝜇𝑛 mass of informed investors trade on private information
Lemma 1.
on stock 𝑛 ∈  , the price of stock 𝑛 in the initial period, 𝑡 = 0, is given by

𝑃 𝑛(0) =

𝑃 𝑛
𝐵
𝑃 𝑛
∅
𝑃 𝑛
𝐺

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝑖𝑓 − 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑋𝑛(0) < 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧
𝑖𝑓 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑋𝑛(0) ≤ −𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧
𝑖𝑓 − 𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧 < 𝑋𝑛(0) ≤ 𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧,

(7)

18 Lemma C.8 in Appendix C shows that a sufficient condition alternative to
Eq. (5) is that the manager has CRRA utility with relative risk aversion close
to one.

19 Firms that implement low effort are indifferent between listing and not
listing, and we assume they do not list. This choice would be strictly optimal
in the presence of any arbitrarily small listing cost.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038845J. Dow et al.

where

𝐵 = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐵𝛥𝑉 , 𝑃 𝑛
𝑃 𝑛

∅ = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 , 𝑃 𝑛

𝐺 = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐺𝛥𝑉 ,

Lemma 2. Each informed investor 𝑖 who receives signal 𝑠𝑛 on stock 𝑛 ∈ 
always finds it optimal to trade at 𝑡 = 0. The expected value of trading stock
𝑛 in Eq. (9) is equal to

and the probability of information revelation (i.e. the price informativeness)
for stock 𝑛 in the initial period, 𝑡 = 0, is given by20

0 = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝛥𝑃 ,
𝐽 𝑛

(10)

𝜆𝑛(0) =

𝜇𝑛
̄𝑧

.

Proof. See Appendix A. ■

(8)

where 𝛥𝑃 is the expected mispricing wedge such that
𝛥𝑃 ≡ [𝜎𝐻 (𝜈𝐺 − 𝜌𝐻 ) + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )(𝜌𝐻 − 𝜈𝐵)

] 𝛥𝑉 .

Further, the price next period, 𝑡 = 1, does not reveal further information,
i.e., 𝜆𝑛(1) = 0.

Given informed investor 𝑖’s choice to produce information on stock

𝑛, we can represent the maximization problem as follows:

Proof. See Appendix A. ■

where 𝐽 𝑛
𝑡 = 0:

0 (𝑠𝑛) ≡
𝐽 𝑛

𝐽 𝑛
0

≡ 𝜎𝐻 𝐽 𝑛

0 (𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺) + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )𝐽 𝑛
0 (𝑠𝑛) is the expected value of trading stock 𝑛 given signal 𝑠𝑛 at

0 (𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵),

(9)

− 𝐸[𝑃 𝑛(0)|𝑠𝑛]𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0) + 𝛾𝛤 𝑛(𝑠𝑛)𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0)

max
𝑥𝑛
𝑖 (0)∈{−1,0,1}
+ (1 − 𝛾)E[𝐽 𝑛

1 (𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0), 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0))|𝑠𝑛],

and 𝛤 𝑛(𝑠𝑛) is the expected value of an early-liquidated unit of position
in stock 𝑛 conditional on 𝑠𝑛:

𝛤 𝑛(𝑠𝑛) ≡ (1 − 𝜏𝑛)E[𝑉 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛] + 𝜏𝑛E[𝑃 𝑛(1)|𝑠𝑛]𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0),

1 (𝑥𝑛

and 𝐽 𝑛
consumer given the position 𝑥𝑛
on 𝑠𝑛 and 𝑃 𝑛(0):

𝑖 , 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) is the expected continuation value at 𝑡 = 1 for a late
𝑖 in the previous period and conditional

1 (𝑥𝑛
𝐽 𝑛

𝑖 , 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) ≡ (1 − 𝜏𝑛)E[𝑉 𝑛

{

|𝑠𝑛]𝑥𝑛

𝑖

+ 𝜏𝑛

max
𝑖 (1)∈{−1,0,1},|𝑥𝑛
𝑥𝑛

[𝑉 𝑛(𝑥𝑛

𝑖 + 𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (1))

E

≤1

𝑖 +𝑥𝑛
𝑖 (1)|
}

− 𝑃 𝑛(1)𝑥𝑛

]
𝑖 (1)|𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)

.

In case the informed investor waits one period (i.e., 𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0) = 0), they
will trade in 𝑡 = 1 only if the firm’ project pays off late (with probability
𝜏𝑛) and if 𝑃 𝑛(0) is non-revealing. On the other hand, the continuation
value of a non-zero position 𝑥𝑛

𝑖 in 𝑡 = 0 is simply E[𝑉 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛]𝑥𝑛

𝑖 .21

The next lemma shows that the problem can be greatly simplified:
first, all informed investors choose to trade at 𝑡 = 0; second, the value
function reduces to a much simpler expression; and third, the price
at 𝑡 = 1 does not contain additional information because there is no
further informed trading.22

20 In the general case, the notation for price informativeness should be

𝜆𝑛(0) = min

( 𝜇𝑛
̄𝑧

)

, 1

.

If 𝜇𝑛 ≥ ̄𝑧 (the mass of informed investors who have private information on
stock 𝑛 is greater than the intensity of noise trading), 𝜆𝑛(0) is equal to one.
But such case never arises in equilibrium because it would be incompatible
with informed investors’ incentives, as is clear from Proposition 1. Therefore,
we use the notation in Eq. (8) for convenience.

21 If the firm’ project pays off late and 𝑃 𝑛(0) is non-revealing, the informed
investor could close the position early in 𝑡 = 1 instead of holding it until 𝑡 = 2.
However, the proof of Lemma 2 shows that closing the position early is never
optimal.

22 Because informed investors are constrained and choose to trade at 𝑡 = 0,
they are not able to engage in extra informed trading in the subsequent period
(𝑡 = 1); they either already hold maximum positions if information is unre-
vealed, or do not have any informational advantage otherwise. Consequently,
only those with liquidity shocks reverse their positions, thus, prices do not
contain additional information at 𝑡 = 1.

Because the stock market is only informative in the initial period,
𝑡 = 0, we suppress dependence of 𝜆𝑛(𝑡) on period 𝑡; henceforth, we
denote firm 𝑛’s price informativeness at 𝑡 = 0 by 𝜆𝑛 instead of 𝜆𝑛(0).23
Now, we move on to the choice of information acquisition at 𝑡 = 0.
The expected trading gains on each stock, as expressed in Eq. (10),
should be equalized across all listed stocks in equilibrium. If they
were different, all informed investors would instead gather private
information only on those with higher expected trading gains. That is,
the indifference condition 𝐽 𝑛
0 must be satisfied for any pair of
stocks 𝑚, 𝑛 ∈  , or equivalently,24

0 = 𝐽 𝑚

(1 − 𝜆𝑛)(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚)(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑚),

(11)

which describes the equilibrium trade-off between mispricing and du-
ration. Informed investors like mispricing but dislike longer duration;
so an increase in duration must be compensated for by an increase in
mispricing, and vice versa.

Furthermore, because there is one unit mass of informed investors
𝑛∈ 𝜇𝑛 = 1), we also have the following condition in equilibrium,

(∑
which we call the informational resource constraint:

∑

𝑛∈

𝜆𝑛 =

1
̄𝑧

.

(12)

Using the results so far, we can show that, given maturity choices,
there is a unique allocation of information acquisition that satisfies the
two constraints.

Proposition 1 (Financial Market Equilibrium). Given {𝜏𝑛}𝑛∈ , there exists
a unique positive solution {𝜆𝑛}𝑛∈ that satisfies both the indifference
condition Eq. (11) and the informational resource constraint Eq. (12).
Furthermore, 𝜆𝑛 is decreasing and concave in 𝜏𝑛, and is increasing in 𝜏𝑚
for 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}.

Proof. See Appendix A. ■

23 In real life, prices may be informative every period adding more informa-
tion over time, but we shut down the channel of this secondary information
revelation for simplicity. Under the setup where prices are informative in each
period, higher price efficiency creates two confounding effects. On the one
hand, higher price efficiency reduces trading benefits by lowering the chance
of acquiring the position at dislocated prices. On the other hand, higher price
efficiency increases trading benefits by reducing the maturity of investment
due to faster convergence of prices to fundamental value. In our paper, we
focus on the former effect by shutting down the latter effect because we are
interested in exploring competition for informed trading among firms. See Dow
et al. (2021) for the analysis on this trade-off.

24 This is analogous to the indifference condition for informed investors
in Dow et al. (2021), where informed investors’ preference for shorter duration
arises from the opportunity cost of capital. The difference is that here,
informed investors prefer shorter horizons due to the possibility of early
liquidation. A similar condition arises in Shleifer and Vishny (1990), but with
exogenous duration and in a model without private signals.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038846J. Dow et al.

The proposition shows that, fixing other listed firms’ maturity
choices, a listed firm’s price informativeness increases as the firm
shortens its own maturity due to investors’ preference for shorter
maturities. Furthermore, there is a spillover effect because a decrease
in one firm’s maturity decreases other firms’ price informativeness.
Because the mass of informed investors is limited, firms compete for
price informativeness.

4.2. Listed firms’ optimal managerial compensation

In this subsection, we derive the optimal managerial compensation
contract of each listed firm. In case the price reveals the signal of
informed investors, managerial compensation depends only on the
signal because it is a sufficient statistic for the final payoff (see, for
example, Holmstrom, 1979; Shavell, 1979). In case the price does not
reveal the signal, managerial compensation depends on the final payoff
whenever possible (either because the manager remains until 𝑡 = 2, or
the manager exits at 𝑡 = 1 and the firm’s project also matures at 𝑡 = 1).
Hence, there are only five states relevant for the contract: (i) the
price reveals the signal to be good (𝜔 = 𝐺), (ii) the price reveals
the signal to be bad (𝜔 = 𝐵), (iii) the price is non-revealing and the
manager stays until a successful outcome (𝜔 = 𝑆), (iv) the price is non-
revealing and the manager stays until an unsuccessful outcome (𝜔 = 𝐹 ),
(v) the price is non-revealing and the manager exits before the outcome
is realized (𝜔 = ∅). A contract will therefore specify non-negative pay-
}
ments corresponding to each of those five states
(we will show that three of these payments must optimally be set to
zero).

𝐹 , 𝑤𝑛

𝐺, 𝑤𝑛

𝐵, 𝑤𝑛

𝑆 , 𝑤𝑛

𝑤𝑛

{

∅

Consider firm 𝑛 ∈  offering a contract to its manager that
induces high managerial effort. We solve the optimal contracting prob-
lem taking maturity choice 𝜏𝑛 and price efficiency 𝜆𝑛 as given. The
shareholders’ wage bill, denoted by E [𝑤𝑛], is given by

[𝑤𝑛]

E

= 𝜆𝑛 (𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)

(
1 − 𝜎𝐻
𝐺 +
[
(1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

)

) 𝑤𝑛
𝐵
(𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝑛

(
1 − 𝜌𝐻

)

) 𝑤𝑛
𝐹

+ 𝛿𝜏𝑛𝑤𝑛
∅

]

.

(13)

An optimal contract {𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 , 𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 , 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐹 , 𝑤∗𝑛

∅

} solves the following

optimization problem that minimizes the shareholders’ wage bill:

 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) ≡

min
,𝑤𝑛
,𝑤𝑛
𝑆
𝐵

,𝑤𝑛
𝐹

{𝑤𝑛
𝐺

,𝑤𝑛
∅

}

[𝑤𝑛] ,

E

(14)

subject to (i) the manager’s participation constraint (PC):

{

[

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)

𝜆𝑛[𝜎𝐻 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

)
+
)
(𝜌𝐻 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝐺

𝑆

(1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

(

1 − 𝜎𝐻
(
+

1 − 𝜌𝐻

) 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

)
]
) 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝐵

𝐹

}

≥ 𝐾,

))

+ 𝛿𝜏𝑛𝑢(𝑤𝑛
∅

]
)

𝑆 +
𝐵 , 𝑤∗𝑛

Furthermore, the shareholders’ wage bill  𝑛 is increasing and convex in 𝜏𝑛,
and its first-order derivative is given by
𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =

]
𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

(20)

𝜕𝜆𝑛
[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
− (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 ) > 0,

where 𝛹 (⋅) is a negative, decreasing, weakly concave function such that

𝛹 (𝑤) ≡ 𝑤 −

𝑢(𝑤)
𝑢′(𝑤)

.

Proof. See Appendix B. ■

Together, Propositions 1 and 2 show that firms with shorter matu-
rity anticipate a lower agency cost. The optimal compensation in state
𝜔 = 𝐺 and 𝜔 = 𝑆 is determined by Eqs. (18)–(19), where Eq. (18) is the
IC constraint, and Eq. (19) is the optimality condition that equates the
marginal costs across the two states. The RHS of Eq. (20) represents the
marginal effect on the wage bill of increased project maturity. The first
term is due to the impact of decreased price informativeness (decreased
𝜆𝑛 from the increase in 𝜏𝑛 due to Proposition 1). This effect is positive
because it is more costly for shareholders to provide incentives when
the price is less informative. The second term is due to the manager’s
impatience in case of positive 𝛿. This effect is also positive because it is
more costly for shareholders to provide incentives with later payments
when the manager may exit early.

4.3. Listed firms’ choice of project maturity

In this subsection, we solve each listed firm’s maturity choice prob-
lem, given endogenous price informativeness, as derived in Section 4.1,
and the optimal contract, as derived in Section 4.2.

Recall that each firm’s production function is increasing in project
maturity (Eq. (1)). In financial market equilibrium, price informative-
ness increases as the firm shortens its project maturity (Proposition 1);
informed investors are willing to accept lower speculative profits at
shorter maturities because the possibility of a liquidity shock makes
them prefer short-horizon stocks. Also, the optimal managerial contract
has a lower wage bill at shorter project maturities (Proposition 2).

By the previous results, we can represent the optimization problem

of the firm’s shareholders in Eq. (2) as

 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) −  𝑛(𝜏𝑛),

max
𝜏𝑛∈[0,1]
where  𝑛(𝜏𝑛) is the expected value of the final payoff given high
managerial effort and maturity choice 𝜏𝑛 as in Eq. (1):

(21)

(15)

 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 ,

and (ii) the manager’s incentive compatibility constraint (IC):

𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎 (𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝐺

)

− 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝐵

))

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)𝛥𝜌 (𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝑆

)

− 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝐹

)) ≥ 𝐾,

and (iii) the limited liability constraint (LL):

𝑤𝑛

𝐺, 𝑤𝑛

𝐵, 𝑤𝑛

𝑆 , 𝑤𝑛

𝐹 , 𝑤𝑛

∅

≥ 0.

(16)

(17)

The solution to the optimization problem in Eqs. (14)–(17) is described
by:

𝐵 = 𝑤∗𝑛

Proposition 2 (Optimal Managerial Contract for Listed Firms). Given 𝜏𝑛,
where 𝑛 ∈  , there exists a unique optimal contract. For this contract,
𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐹 = 𝑤∗𝑛
∅
simultaneously solve
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

𝑆 > 0 where 𝑤∗𝑛

= 0 and 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛

(18)

= 𝐾

)

)

𝑆

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
(
𝑆
𝑆 ) = 𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻 𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 ).

(19)

and  𝑛(𝜏𝑛) is the wage bill under the optimal contract given 𝜏𝑛 as
defined in Eq. (14).

We can now show that there exists a unique choice of project
duration that maximizes shareholder value. This choice is determined
by the trade-off between production efficiency and agency costs.

Proposition 3 (Optimal Maturity Choice). Given the choices of other firms’
project duration {𝜏𝑚}𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}, there exists a unique interior solution 𝜏∗𝑛
for each firm’s project duration that solves in the optimization problem in
Eq. (21). Furthermore, 𝜏∗𝑛 solves

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗𝑛) =

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻

]
1 − 𝛿𝜏∗𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
(
𝑆 )

− (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 ),

(22)

where 𝑤∗𝑛
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 simultaneously solve:

)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
(
𝑆
𝑆 ) = 𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻 𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 ).

)

= 𝐾

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038847J. Dow et al.

The shareholder value for firm 𝑛 ∈  is given by

𝑆∗𝑛 ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏∗𝑛) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 −

[𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛)

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛
(

𝑆

] .

(23)

Definition 1. An equilibrium consists of a number 𝑁 of listed firms,
project maturity choices {𝜏𝑛}𝑛∈ , price informativeness {𝜆𝑛}𝑛∈ , and
compensation contracts {𝑤𝑛}𝑛∈ such that,

Proof. See Appendix C.

■

Eq. (22) is the first-order condition for the optimization problem
(derived from Eqs. (1) and (20)), whose LHS is the marginal change
in the firm’s production, and the RHS is the marginal change in the
expected cost of compensation. Note that we suppress dependence of
𝜆𝑛, 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐻 on 𝜏∗𝑛 to save on notation.

𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛

How does a firm’s maturity choice affect other firms? The next

proposition provides the answer:

Proposition 4 (Strategic Complementarity). A firm’s optimal maturity
choice 𝜏∗𝑛 in Proposition 3 is increasing in other firms’ maturity choices,
that is,
𝜕𝜏∗𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚

for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}.

> 0

The proposition establishes that firms’ maturity choices are strategic
complements:25 when one firm chooses a shorter maturity project, the
other firms want to do the same. Intuitively, when a firm shortens its
project maturity, it increases its price informativeness at the expense
of other firms’ price informativeness (Proposition 1). Thus, other firms’
agency cost goes up, increasing their marginal benefit of shortening
project maturity to regain price informativeness.

4.4. Unlisted firms and the listing decision

In equilibrium, all managers of unlisted firms exert low effort be-
cause a firm that decides to implement high effort can improve value by
listing and using the stock price as an informative signal of managerial
effort in the compensation contract.

Unlisted firms do not need to provide incentives, so they choose
long-term projects (𝜏 = 1) and obtain high value with probability 𝜌𝐿.
Therefore, shareholder value for unlisted firms, denoted 𝑆𝑈 , is

𝑆𝑈 ≡ 𝑓 (1) + 𝜌𝐿𝛥𝑉 .

(24)

A firm’s listing choice is based on the comparison between 𝑆∗𝑛 in
Eq. (23) and 𝑆𝑈 in Eq. (24), taking all other firms’ choices as given.
Thus, listing is optimal for firm 𝑛 ∈  if 𝑆∗𝑛 ≥ 𝑆𝑈 , and not listing is
optimal if 𝑆𝑈 ≥ 𝑆∗𝑛 (in this case 𝑆∗𝑛 is shareholder value if the firm
were to list). This includes the possibility that firms are indifferent.
When analyzing this case, we ignore the integer constraint on the
number of firms and consider it a continuous variable for analytical
simplicity.26

5. Equilibrium

This section describes the equilibrium concept, shows equilibrium

existence, and characterizes equilibrium properties.

1. Given the choices of other firms {𝜏𝑚}𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}, shareholders of
each firm 𝑛 ∈  choose maturity 𝜏𝑛 to maximize the firm value
in Eq. (21).

2. Given {𝜏𝑛}𝑛∈ , price informativeness {𝜆𝑛}𝑛∈ satisfies the in-
difference condition Eq. (11) and the informational resource
constraint Eq. (12).

3. Given 𝜏𝑛 and 𝜆𝑛, shareholders of each firm 𝑛 ∈  choose
contract 𝑤𝑛 to minimize the expected cost of managerial com-
pensation in Eq. (14).

4. Firms’ listing decisions are optimal as described in Section 4.4.

We focus on pure strategy equilibria for our analysis.28 In case
some firms remain unlisted, consider listed firms only. Because their
payoff functions are symmetric and their best responses are increasing
in project duration (Proposition 4), any pure strategy equilibrium must
feature symmetric maturity choices among listed firms. Then price
informativeness should be identical across all listed firms due to the
indifference condition Eq. (11); the informational resource constraint
Eq. (12) therefore implies that price informativeness should be equal
to

𝜆𝑛 =

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

for all 𝑛 ∈  .

(25)

If an individual listed firm increases its project maturity, it loses in-
formed investors and its price informativeness decreases, as shown in
Proposition 1, i.e., 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 < 0 for all 𝑛 ∈  . However, if all listed
firms do so by the same quantity, there is no change to informative-
ness because the total mass of informed investors is fixed (Eq. (25));
attracting informed trade is a zero-sum game.29

Consider any individual firm 𝑛 ∈  choosing its level of maturity
𝜏𝑛 when all other listed firms choose the same maturity 𝜏∗. If 𝜏𝑛 =
𝜏∗ satisfies the first-order condition in Eq. (22), 𝜏∗ is an equilibrium
maturity choice. We can show that such an equilibrium 𝜏∗ exists, is
unique, and is interior.

Theorem 1. There exists a unique equilibrium. There is a critical value
𝛾 ∗ for investor short-termism such that all firms list if 𝛾 ≤ 𝛾 ∗, whereas some
firms remain unlisted otherwise. The equilibrium project maturity choice for
listed firms is symmetric and interior, and satisfies

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) = 𝛩(𝜏∗)

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺) − 𝜌𝐻

]
1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(
𝑆 )

−

(

1 −

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝑆 ),

(26)

where 𝛩(𝜏∗), the sensitivity of price informativeness to project maturity, is
given by

𝛩(𝜏∗) ≡ −

𝛾(𝑁 − 1)(𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1)
𝑁 2 ̄𝑧(1 − 𝛾𝜏∗)

< 0,

and 𝑤∗

𝐺 and 𝑤∗

𝑆 simultaneously solve
) (

(

(27)

(28)

(29)

]

.

(30)

5.1. Definition and existence

We define equilibrium as follows:27

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗
𝐺

)

+

1 −

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌𝑢′(𝑤∗

𝑆 ) = 𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻 𝑢′(𝑤∗

𝐺).

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤∗

)

= 𝐾

𝑆

25 The proof of Proposition 4 shows that the game played by firms at
the maturity choice stage is a supermodular game, i.e., a game of strategic
complementarities (Topkis, 1998). In a supermodular game, best responses are
increasing.

26 This simplifying assumption is prevalent in the economics literature

(e.g., Perry, 1984; Dye, 1993; Harris and Raviv, 2008).

27 Although they are determined as part of equilibrium, we drop some less
important ingredients for brevity in Definition 1. For example, realizations
of prices and order flows are not needed because only price informativeness
matters for the equilibrium choice of project maturities.

Shareholder value for each firm is given by

𝑆∗ ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏∗) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 −

[ 1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝜎𝐻 𝑤∗

𝐺 +

(

1 −

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

) (

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤∗

𝑆

28 Echenique and Edlin (2004) show that when a game with strategic
complementarities has mixed strategy equilibria, these equilibria are unstable.
This justifies our focus on pure strategy equilibria.

29 Strictly speaking, since the payoffs are not fixed in total, the game itself
is not zero-sum, but the amount of informed trade is fixed so intuitively, if we
regard informed trade as the reward, it is a zero sum game.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038848J. Dow et al.

Fig. 1. The Impact of Investor Short-Termism on Equilibrium Shareholder Value and Listing Decisions. Parameter values: 𝜌𝐻 = 0.4; 𝜎𝐻 = 0.85; 𝛥𝜌 = 0.35; 𝛥𝜎 = 0.8; 𝑀 = 10; 𝑧 =
√
1∕9; 𝐾 = 1; 𝛿 = 0; 𝛥𝑉 = 10. The maturity-sensitive component of a firm’s output is 𝑓 (𝜏) =

1 − (1 − 𝜏)2, and the utility of a manager given wage 𝑤 is 𝑢(𝑤) = 𝑤1−𝛼 with 𝛼 = 0.8.

Proof. See Appendix D. ■

5.2. Benchmark cases

Whether firms list depends on the value of market monitoring that
comes from an informative share price. For 𝛾 ≤ 𝛾 ∗, all firms opt
for listing, and the equilibrium shareholder value 𝑆∗ exceeds 𝑆𝑈 (the
value of unlisted firms in Eq. (24)). Fig. 1 provides an illustration. The
incremental value 𝑆∗ −𝑆𝑈 , resulting from listing, illustrates the benefits
of market monitoring: informative stock prices enable firms to provide
better incentives and implement the high level of managerial effort,
thereby increasing firm value.30

However, the short-termism trap can destroy this value. As investor
short-termism intensifies (𝛾 increases), 𝑆∗ falls due to heightened com-
petition among firms for price informativeness, as illustrated in the left
panel of Fig. 1 . Once investor short-termism exceeds 𝛾 ∗, as illustrated
in the right panel of Fig. 1, some firms choose to remain unlisted; in
equilibrium firms are indifferent between listing or not, so equilibrium
shareholder value equals 𝑆𝑈 . In other words, when 𝛾 > 𝛾 ∗, the short-
termism trap completely nullifies the value of market monitoring. This
is because listed firms are subjected to such intense investor pressure
that they choose excessively short-term projects to an extent that offsets
all the incentive benefits of an informative share price.

Intuitively, the critical value for investor short-termism 𝛾 ∗ depends
on the intensity of the agency problem which, fixing other parameters,
can be quantified through the managerial effort cost 𝐾. 𝛾 ∗ is less than
one only if 𝐾 is sufficiently large.31

30 More generally, we can define the value of market monitoring as the
difference between 𝑆∗ and the greater out of the unlisted value (low effort),
and the value if firms were forced to implement high effort without relying on
an informative share price, which we define in Section 5.2.1 and denote 𝑆𝐸𝑃
(Eq. (33)). Thus, the value of market monitoring equals 𝑆∗ −max{𝑆 𝑈 , 𝑆𝐸𝑃 }. For
the parameter values in Fig. 1, market monitoring is necessary to implement
the high level of managerial effort, that is, 𝑆 𝑈 > 𝑆𝐸𝑃 .

31 In the proof of the theorem, we establish two values 𝐾1, 𝐾2, such that
0 < 𝐾1 < 𝐾2 < ̄𝐾. If 𝐾 is less than or equal to 𝐾1, 𝛾 ∗ = 1 and all firms decide
to list. For 𝐾 between 𝐾1 and 𝐾2, 𝛾 ∗ ∈ (0, 1) and, therefore, some firms opt to
stay unlisted at sufficiently high 𝛾 values. If 𝐾 exceeds 𝐾2, some firms remain
unlisted for all 𝛾 values.

We study two benchmark cases: (i) firms must induce high effort
without stock market prices, (ii) a coordinated benchmark where listed
firms coordinate their project maturity choices. To have a more inter-
esting comparison, we focus on parameter values where managers are
impatient (𝛿 > 0).32 Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium as well as
the equilibrium characteristics can be trivially proven as special cases
of Theorem 1.

5.2.1. High effort without price

Suppose that firms could only use the final payoff to incentivize
managers to exert high effort, without using the share price. We call
this the ‘‘effort without price’’ benchmark. Note that this is not an equi-
librium of our model and differs from the unlisted value in equilibrium,
in case some firms choose to remain unlisted, because firms only choose
to remain unlisted if they decide not to induce high effort.

In this benchmark, each firm’s maturity choice 𝜏𝐸𝑃 should satisfy
the first-order condition in Eq. (22) assuming 𝜆𝑛 = 0 and 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 = 0,
which is equivalent to

𝑓 ′(𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) = −𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤𝐸𝑃
where 𝑤𝐸𝑃
𝑆

solves

𝑆 ),

(1 − 𝛿𝜏𝐸𝑃 )𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝐸𝑃

𝑆

)

= 𝐾.

The shareholder value for each firm is given by

𝑆𝐸𝑃 ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 −

1 − 𝛿𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝐸𝑃
(
𝑆 .

(31)

(32)

(33)

To understand how this benchmark differs from the situation where
some firms choose to remain unlisted in equilibrium, consider the fol-
lowing comparison. If effort cost is low enough, all firms will choose to

32 Without impatience (𝛿 = 0), in the cases of both benchmarks, firms will
choose the maximal maturity 𝜏𝑛 = 1 because reducing 𝜏 to provide early
compensation does not improve the manager’s utility, hence does not reduce
the wage bill. Note that our main message, that there is a race to the bottom
in project duration, remains robust when managers are long-lived; however,
the comparison to the benchmarks is not as rich.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038849J. Dow et al.

list in equilibrium, and the effort without price benchmark corresponds
to forcing firms to remain unlisted, in which case they would want to
induce effort anyway using only the final payoff. If effort cost is higher,
the effort without price benchmark corresponds to forcing firms to be
unlisted and induce high effort (even though, given that they cannot
list, they would prefer to implement low effort).33

5.2.2. Coordinated project maturity choice benchmark

We also consider a benchmark where listed firms coordinate their
project maturity choices. This internalizes the externality of project ma-
turity on other firms and, in this sense, provides a natural constrained-
efficient benchmark.34 In this benchmark, project maturity is chosen
uniformly across listed firms to maximize their aggregate shareholder
value in Eq. (21):

max
𝜏∈[0,1]

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

[ 𝑛(𝜏) −  𝑛(𝜏)

] ,

(34)

Because project maturity varies simultaneously for all listed firms
in this expression, there is no reallocation of informed trading across
firms, i.e., the sensitivity of informed trading is zero and price informa-
tiveness is equal across all stocks as given by Eq. (25). Then, the optimal
project duration, denoted 𝜏𝐶𝐵, satisfies the first-order condition

𝑓 ′(𝜏𝐶𝐵) = −

(

1 −

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝑆 ),

and 𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝐺 and 𝑤𝐶𝐵
(

𝑆

𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝐺

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

simultaneously solve

) (

+

1 −

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌𝑢′(𝑤𝐶𝐵

1 − 𝛿𝜏𝐶𝐵) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝑆

𝑆 ) = 𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻 𝑢′(𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝐺 ).

)

= 𝐾

(35)

(36)

(37)

Each firm’s shareholder value is given by

𝑆𝐶𝐵 ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏𝐶𝐵) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 −

[ 1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝐺 +

(

1 −

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

) (

1 − 𝛿𝜏𝐶𝐵) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝑆

]

.

(38)

This coordinated project maturity choice benchmark (henceforth
coordinated benchmark) also has two alternative interpretations. First,
it is the equilibrium that would arise if informed investors were not
mobile across firms, so were allocated equally across all listed firms,
resulting in 𝜆𝑛 = 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) being fixed and 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 = 0 in the first-order
condition of Eq. (22). Second, it is as if investors had long horizons
(𝛾 = 0), making 𝛩(𝜏∗) equal to zero in Eq. (27).

5.3. Excessive short-termism

We now compare equilibrium to these benchmarks (Section 5.2.2).35
In the following discussion, when we refer to equilibrium project
maturity, we mean project maturity of listed firms. The comparison
illustrates the interaction among different economic forces. First, using
stock prices allows a firm to incentivize the manager more efficiently,
thereby increasing firm value. Second, price informativeness reacts to
project maturity: shorter maturity is advantageous to an individual
firm because it attracts informed investors, fixing other firms’ maturity
choices. Third, other firms also have an incentive to shorten their own

33 More formally, it can easily be shown there exists a critical value 𝐾0 for
the effort cost such that 𝑆 𝑈 < 𝑆𝐸𝑃 if and only if 𝐾 < 𝐾0, where 𝑆𝑈 and 𝑆𝐸𝑃
as defined in Eqs. (24) and (33) respectively. Since 𝐾0 < 𝐾1 (see Footnote 31),
all firms choose to list for 𝐾 ≤ 𝐾0.
34 Equivalently, we can think of a social planner who chooses listed firms’
project maturities to maximize their aggregate shareholder value taking asset
price informativeness in Eqs. (11)–(12) as given. The planner also faces the
same agency problem faced by firms.

35 To be clear, the number of listed firms in the coordinated benchmark is

taken to be the equilibrium number of listed firms from Theorem 1.

project maturity. But, this just leads to a race to the bottom where there
are no winners: firms have inefficiently short maturities, but still have
exactly the same price informativeness as they would have without
competition for informed trade.

The first-order conditions (Eqs. (26), (31) and (35)) describe the
trade-off between production efficiency and agency cost in the three
different cases. In each equation, the LHS captures the marginal change
in production with respect to a change in project maturity and the RHS
captures the marginal change in agency cost with respect to a change
in project maturity.

In the effort without price benchmark, the RHS in Eq. (31) shows
that pursuing a longer-term project increases the agency cost when
the manager is impatient (𝛿 > 0). In the coordinated benchmark,
price informativeness dampens this effect. This is illustrated by the
coefficient (1 − 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧)) in the RHS of Eq. (35). With probability 𝜆𝑛 =
1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) the price is informative, allowing the manager to be rewarded
in the short term even if the project has not matured.

This allows the firm to pursue longer term projects without im-
pairing incentives, thereby enhancing value. We call this the ‘‘price
information effect’’. It is an example of the effect that has been high-
lighted in previous literature (e.g., Holmstrom and Tirole, 1993): stock
prices are useful for monitoring managers.

On the other hand, in equilibrium, the first term on the RHS of
Eq. (26) captures the impact on agency costs of competition among
firms. Individually, a firm can enhance value by shortening project
maturity to attract informed trade and thereby reduce agency costs
(Eq. (22) and Proposition 3). However, this creates a negative spillover
effect to other firms, and does not result in any benefit in equilibrium
once others’ reactions are endogenized. That is, price informativeness is
still at the same level 𝜆𝑛 = 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) for all 𝑛 ∈  , but project maturities
are overly shortened as a result of competition.36 This leads to a loss in
value. We call this the ‘‘competition for informativeness effect’’.

The following theorem summarizes the result.

Theorem 2 (Excessive Short-Termism). The coordinated benchmark has the
longest maturity, i.e.,
(𝜏∗, 𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) .

𝜏𝐶𝐵 > max

Furthermore, equilibrium has shorter maturity than the effort without price
benchmark (𝜏𝐸𝑃 > 𝜏∗) if and only if the competition for informativeness
effect dominates the price information effect, i.e.,

𝛩(𝜏∗)

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺) − 𝜌𝐻
[(

1 −

]
1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(
𝑆 )
]
1
𝑆 ) − 𝛹 (𝑤𝐸𝑃
𝑆 )
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛹 (𝑤∗

)

.

(39)

> 𝛿𝜌𝐻

Proof. See Appendix E. ■

The coordinated benchmark has a longer maturity than the ef-
fort without price benchmark because of the price information effect:
shareholders can lengthen project maturity using stock prices while
still giving good managerial incentives. However, informed traders
can switch between firms and are attracted to shorter-term projects.
Recognizing this, firms can make their stock prices more informative by
choosing projects that are more likely to mature early (the competition
for informativeness effect). This offsetting effect may be strong enough
that firms choose maturities that are even shorter than if they had no
stock market listing at all. The LHS of Eq. (39) reflects the competition

36 If the number of informed traders was endogenous, as opposed to fixed as
in our model, informed trading would increase when maturity was reduced.
However, as long as informed traders’ entry was not perfectly elastic there
would remain a spillover effect, causing a larger marginal benefit to the
individual firm from reducing maturity compared to the marginal change in
the total value of all firms (as in Eq. (34)). Thus, our results on excessive
short-termism would remain robust.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388410J. Dow et al.

Fig. 2. Equilibrium Maturity Choice vs. Maturity Choices under Different Benchmarks. Parameter values: 𝜌𝐻 = .4, 𝜎𝐻 = .85, 𝛥𝜌 = .35, 𝛥𝜎 = .8, 𝐾 = 1, 𝑁 = 10, 𝑧 = 1, 𝛿 = .5, 𝛥𝑉 = 10.
1 − (1 − 𝜏)2, and the utility of a manager given wage 𝑤 is 𝑢(𝑤) = 𝑤1−𝛼 with 𝛼 = .4. The dashed (solid) line shows
The maturity-sensitive component of a firm’s output is 𝑓 (𝜏) =
the marginal change in wage bill under 𝛾 = .8 (𝛾 = .4). The maturity choice is determined where the marginal change in the wage bill equals that in production. The equilibrium
maturity choice 𝜏∗ becomes shorter with shorter investor horizons (𝛾 = .8).

√

effect (the first term in Eq. (26)), and the RHS reflects the price
information effect (differentials between Eq. (31) and the second term
in Eq. (26)). Fig. 2 shows examples under different values of 𝛾.

Shorter term projects in our model have lower final payoffs because
𝑓 (𝜏) is increasing in 𝜏. Therefore, we have 𝑓 (𝜏𝐶𝐵) > 𝑓 (𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) > 𝑓 (𝜏∗)
in case 𝜏𝐶𝐵 > 𝜏𝐸𝑃 > 𝜏∗; equilibrium has the smallest production of
output compared to the two benchmarks. To address overall efficiency,
the next theorem nets off managerial compensation.

Theorem 3 (Constrained Inefficiency). Shareholder value for each firm
across different cases is ranked as

𝑆𝐸𝑃 < 𝑆∗ < 𝑆𝐶𝐵.

Proof. See Appendix E.

■

The theorem shows that firms would improve shareholder value if
they lengthened their maturities in a coordinated manner. In this sense,
equilibrium is constrained inefficient, and shareholder value is subop-
timally low due to firms competing for a fixed amount of informed
trading by choosing short-term projects. This is parallel with the classi-
cal idea of the ‘‘tragedy of the commons’’ (e.g., Hardin, 1968; Levhari
and Mirman, 1980) where individuals, who have access to a common
pool of resource but do not internalize their externalities, end up
with a tragic overexploitation of resource (such as fisheries, irrigation
systems). In our model, informed trading is the common resource which
can be used for more informative managerial compensation schemes.

The theorem also shows that, despite the short-termism trap, equi-
librium shareholder value exceeds that in the effort without price
benchmark. This is immediate because listed firms always have the op-
tion
compensation
to
contracts.

information

disregard

price

their

in

5.4. Comparative statics

5.4.1. The impact of increased competition

According to conventional wisdom, competition makes firms leaner,
in other words, more efficient and more profitable (e.g., Porter, 1990).
In the literature on optimal contracting, however, it has been noted that
increased competition may not always lead to an improvement. More
competition in product markets may increase agency costs (e.g., Nale-
buff and Stiglitz, 1983; Scharfstein, 1988; Hermalin, 1992; Schmidt,
1997; Raith, 2003). We also use an agency framework, but we study
a different channel for competition. In a highly competitive industry,
not only are firms desperate to attract buyers, they are also desperate
to attract investors. Firms compete for informed investors who have
industry-specific knowledge and limited trading capital.

We can show analytically that more intense competition leads to
increased short-termism. In our comparative statics, we consider the
case where all firms list (i.e., 𝑁 = 𝑀) and fix the product 𝑀 ̄𝑧 to be
a constant to keep the quantity of informed trade per firm (relative
to noise trade) at the same level.37 Because an increase in 𝑀 is
compensated by a decrease in ̄𝑧, the equilibrium price informativeness
is unchanged regardless of the level of 𝑀, thus, equals that in Eq. (25).

Proposition 5 (Competition). Consider the case where all firms list. Fix-
ing 𝑀 ̄𝑧, higher competition induces more short-termism and lower share-

37 The result in Proposition 5 on equilibrium short-termism is unchanged if
we vary 𝑀 with ̄𝑧 fixed and consider both cases where all firms list and some
firms remain unlisted. In this general case, 𝜏 ∗ and 𝑆∗ decrease in 𝑀 in case
all firms list, and are unaffected by 𝑀 when some firms remain unlisted. See
the proof of Proposition 5.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388411J. Dow et al.

holder value, i.e., 𝜏∗ and 𝑆∗ decrease in 𝑀. By contrast, the coordinated
benchmark has no change in 𝜏𝐶𝐵 and 𝑆𝐶𝐵.

Proof. See Appendix F.

■

Our prediction is broadly consistent with empirical findings in the
literature. There is some evidence that product market competition can
induce short-term pressure (e.g., Aghion et al., 2013; Acharya and Xu,
2017).

choices are strategic complements (Proposition 4), there is an ampli-
fication effect in equilibrium that is absent in the coordinated bench-
mark. That is, equilibrium short-termism is more sensitive to agency
cost parameters compared to the coordinated benchmark.38

By the same token, lengthening the horizon of all investors mitigates
the short-termism trap and raises shareholder value. However, this
may not be the case if only some investors have long horizons, since
Proposition 7 relies on all investors having identical horizons.

5.4.2. The impact of shorter investor horizons

The comparative statics of the equilibrium with respect to investor
horizons are particularly important because they tell us about the
effects of shocks that may perturb investor horizons.

Proposition 6 (Investor Short-Termism). A shift in investor preferences
toward early consumption induces more short-termism and weakly lower
shareholder value, i.e., 𝜏∗ is decreasing in 𝛾, and 𝑆∗ is weakly decreasing
in 𝛾. By contrast, the coordinated benchmark has no change in 𝜏𝐶𝐵 and
𝑆𝐶𝐵.

Proof. See Appendix F.

■

When investors become more short-term oriented, they become
more responsive to a firm’s decrease in project maturity. As a result, the
sensitivity of price informativeness 𝛩(𝜏∗) in Eq. (27) becomes more neg-
ative as 𝛾 increases. That is, the competition for informativeness effect
becomes more pronounced, resulting in more excessive corporate short-
termism. As equilibrium project maturity decreases further compared to
the coordinated benchmark value, shareholder value decreases. Fig. 1
provides an illustration.

Dow et al. (2021) show that investor short-termism emerges en-
dogenously because of capital constraints. A shock that reduces price
efficiency increases the opportunity cost of investing in long-term
assets. This makes long-lived but capital-constrained informed investors
behave as if they were more short-term oriented (i.e., as if 𝛾 was larger).
Therefore, we can interpret the comparative statics in Proposition 6 as
a change in market conditions: shocks that originate in the financial
market can propagate to the real economy when firms compete for
informed trading. So a shock that reduces investor capital, which is
then manifested as increased investor myopia, can lead to more short-
termism in project selection as we show in this paper. Since Dow
et al. (2021) also show that a transitory shock can have long-term
effects on efficiency and investor horizons, it follows that via the short-
termism trap, the post-financial crisis economy will perform less well
than before.

5.4.3. The impact of more severe agency problems

Managerial effort cost and impatience aggravate the managerial
agency problem even with a single firm, and this effect is multiplied
by the externality in project duration.

Proposition 7 (Amplification of the Agency Problem). Consider the case
where all firms list. An increase in managers’ impatience or effort cost
induces more short-termism and lower shareholder value in equilibrium,
i.e., 𝜏∗ and 𝑆∗ decrease in 𝛿 and 𝐾. This effect is larger than the corre-
sponding effect in the coordinated benchmark.

5.5. Value of information at different horizons

Our baseline model assumes that the value of information is inde-
pendent of project maturity. More generally however, one can readily
think of various reasons why the production of information could be
more or less valuable at longer horizons. On the investor side, for
example, long-term projects may be more uncertain, so that learn-
ing their value could be more valuable. Additionally, the cost (or
opportunity cost) to produce information, and the precision of that
information may vary with the horizon. On the firm side, long-term
performance metrics may be less informative about managerial effort
due to confounding events over the project’s lifespan: if long-term
profits are subject to many exogenous shocks as well as reflecting
managerial effort, early price signals are more valuable for measuring
and rewarding managerial performance.

In this subsection, we explore the impact of some of these effects on
the short-termism trap. Our analysis shows that varying the maturity-
dependent value of information can either lengthen or shorten project
maturity, but suggests that it is unlikely to reverse our main findings.
In particular, there will still be an externality in project horizon choice
that biases project horizon away from the coordinated benchmark.
However, we show that in extreme cases, for example where long
term information is a lot more valuable but has the same opportunity
cost of production, the direction of this externality could be reversed:
projects could be excessively long term compared to the coordinated
benchmark. On balance, we consider the short-term case to be the more
relevant one empirically.

Finally, we conclude this subsection with a discussion of the inverse
relationship between project maturity and price informativeness, which
is a key mechanism in our model.

5.5.1. Long-term information more valuable to investors

First, we consider the parameter 𝛼 introduced in Section 3.1. Thus
far we have set 𝛼 = 0 and we now consider the case 𝛼 > 0. Recall that
𝛼 > 0 means that the volatility of output increases with project matu-
rity. This increases the informational advantage of privately-informed
investors for long-term projects.39 It will therefore dampen the short
term preference of informed investors: ex-ante, and incorporating the
probability that informed investors may leave early, we show in Ap-
pendix J that the indifference condition Eq. (11) becomes

(1 − 𝜆𝑛)(1 − 𝜏𝑛 ̂𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚)(1 − 𝜏𝑚 ̂𝛾)

(40)

for any pair of stocks 𝑚, 𝑛 ∈  , where we define investors effective
short-termism as

̂𝛾 ≡ 𝛾 − 𝛼(1 − 𝛾).

(41)

Proof. See Appendix F.

■

As the agency problem becomes more severe, equilibrium becomes
more short-term. In contrast to the comparative statics results in Propo-
sitions 5 and 6 that leave the coordinated benchmark unaffected, a
more severe agency problem decreases project maturity in the co-
ordinated benchmark also. However, because firms’ project maturity

38 When some firms remain unlisted, 𝜏 ∗ and 𝑁 must adjust to an increase
in 𝛿 or 𝐾 so that firms are indifferent between listing and not listing. In this
case, the proof of Proposition 7 shows that an increase in 𝛿 or 𝐾 reduces the
number of listed firms 𝑁 so that shareholder value does not change with 𝛿 or
𝐾, but the effect on listed firms’ project duration is ambiguous.
|𝑠𝑛) − E (𝑉 𝑛) |] = 2𝜎𝐻 (1−𝜎𝐻 )(𝜈𝐺 −
39 Formally, Eqs. (1) and (3) imply E [|E (𝑉 𝑛
𝜈𝐵)𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝜏 𝑛𝛼), i.e., the gap between the value of the project conditional on
private information vs. prior information scales up with project maturity.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388412J. Dow et al.

Whether investors have a preference for long-term or short-term firms
depends on the combined effect of their limited horizons (𝛾) and the
informational advantage of long-term projects (𝛼). Eq. (41) gives the
interaction between these effects: investors prefer short-term projects
if ̂𝛾 > 0 and prefer long-term projects if ̂𝛾 < 0. ̂𝛾 is increasing in 𝛾 and
decreasing in 𝛼. Effective short-termism is strictly positive so long as 𝛾 is
large enough. On the other hand, for any 𝛾 < 1, effective short-termism
will become negative at sufficiently high values of 𝛼.

Since 𝛼 affects the firm’s problem only indirectly via ̂𝛾, the model
solution with 𝛼 > 0 is the same as our benchmark model with 𝛾
replaced by ̂𝛾.40 Higher values of 𝛼 decrease ̂𝛾 and therefore mitigate
the inefficiencies associated with investor short-termism (Proposition 6)
but do not eliminate the short-termism trap provided that ̂𝛾 > 0. If 𝛼
is so high that ̂𝛾 < 0, the model leads to excessive long-termism. The
externality is still present, but its direction is reversed. However, we
consider this scenario to be unrealistic given the extensive evidence on
investor short-term biases (such as the evidence cited in Footnote 1).

The parameter 𝛼 scales the uncertainty of long-term projects, but
variation in the value of information at different horizons could arise
through different channels such as varying the cost and precision of
information (see, for example, Han and Sangiorgi, 2018). We explore
this in Appendix K, where we provide an alternative extension of the
model that scales informed trading profits by a factor 𝜒(𝜏𝑛), where 0 <
𝜒(𝜏𝑛) ≤ 1, that is a function of project maturity 𝜏𝑛. Our interpretation
of 𝜒 being increasing in 𝜏𝑛 is that long-term information is cheaper to
produce or more precise (and vice versa if 𝜒 is decreasing).

In that analysis, the indifference condition for informed investors
in Eq. (11) is adjusted to this scaling factor, in a way that is anal-
ogous to Eq. (40). The resulting outcomes are similar to the effects
of 𝛼: the short-termism trap remains unless the scaling factor strongly
favors long-term information production. The short-termism trap also
remains, for a given scaling factor, so long as investor short-termism is
sufficiently strong.

To summarize the conclusions of this subsection, so long as the
net effect of the different economic forces still leaves investors with
a preference for short-term projects, firms will cater to investor pref-
erences and choose project durations that are too short relative to
the coordinated benchmark. On the other hand, if the net effect is to
create an investor preference for long-term projects, there will still be
a suboptimal choice of project duration, but they will be too long-term,
although in our judgement this case is less relevant in practice.

5.5.2. Long-term information more valuable to firms

Not only investors, but also firms may have preferences for informa-
tion that depend on project maturity. It is plausible that the information
in short term stock prices (period 0 in our model) is more valuable
when the firm chooses a long term project, ceteris paribus. The reason is
that project payoffs are affected by factors that are unconnected with
managerial performance such as macroeconomic shocks, geopolitical
shocks, industry-wide technological advances, etc. Over a long time
period, more of these shocks arrive. This implies that outcomes for long-
term projects are less informative about managerial effort compared to
short-term projects. In this case, an early price signal about managerial
effort is more valuable to the firm as project maturity increases.

We implement this idea in the model assuming an additional layer
of randomization if the project realizes late, whereby the probability
of success becomes 𝜌𝑒(1 − 𝛽) for some 𝛽 ∈ [0, 1) for 𝑒 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿}. The
probability of success when the project realizes early is unchanged

compared to our benchmark model and equal to 𝜌𝑒 for 𝑒 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿}.
For simplicity, we further assume that if the project pays off late, its
risky component in case of success equals 𝛥𝑉 ∕(1 − 𝛽).41

We show in Appendix J that in this framework the optimal con-
tract is identical to the one in Proposition 2,42 with the managerial
impatience parameter 𝛿 replaced by

̂𝛿 = 𝛿 + 𝛽(1 − 𝛿).

(42)

̂𝛿 is increasing in both 𝛿 and 𝛽. Therefore, the effect
By Eq. (42),
of noisier long-term performance measures is equivalent to worsening
the agency problem, that is, an increase in 𝛽 has the same effect
as an increase in 𝛿. This worsens the short-termism trap, as shown
in Proposition 7. So if, as seems plausible, short term price signals
are more important for long term projects, the short termism trap is
worsened.

5.5.3. Inverse relationship between price informativeness and project hori-
zon

Our model emphasizes that short-term projects allow firms to pro-
vide superior incentives due to their superior informativeness. While
stock prices are only informative in the initial period in our model
(Section 4.1), we acknowledge that stock prices may provide repeated
informative signals for long-term projects in more complex dynamic
settings: during the lifespan of a long-term project, there is a longer
time series of price data, hence, more signals.

First note that these additional signals in general need not have
the same relevance for assessing managerial efforts compared to early
price signals. In line with the discussion in Section 5.5.2, the early
signals are more relevant in the case when later, investors learn about
exogenous shocks affecting long-term performance that are unrelated
to managerial effort.

Second, the presence of small frictions may cause the prices of
long-term assets to be informative only in periods close to the asset’s
maturity, as in Dow and Gorton (1994). They show that if there is a
small cost of carry, informed traders with short horizons will optimally
ignore their information signals until a threshold time period that may
be close to the asset’s maturity. It follows that if informed traders can
choose which signals to receive (i.e. there is cost or opportunity cost
of information production), they will choose stocks that are close to
liquidation (for a stock that pays a single liquidating dividend; more
generally, they will choose to receive signals about information that
will likely become public soon). So if the manager exits before the price
is informative, the stock price cannot be used to incentivize managerial
effort for long-term projects.

Third, even if stock prices are equally informative about managerial
effort in each period, price signals from a long-term project do not auto-
matically equate to better incentive schemes. Dow et al. (2021) develop
a stationary dynamic framework with short and long-term assets, and
show that long-term assets (unlike short-term assets) may get ‘‘stuck’’
in a regime with low price informativeness. In this regime, traders can
buy long-term assets that are mispriced based on their private infor-
mation, but cannot sell them soon afterwards at prices reflecting that
information, and may be unable to profit unless they hold the assets
to maturity. This disincentivizes traders from producing information
about long-term assets. This effect can be so severe that long-term
assets may have lower total informativeness even aggregating per-
period price informativeness over all periods. In this case, short-term
assets provide more overall price information and better incentives. In

40 More precisely, since the ex-ante value of the firm under high effort

changes to

E(𝑉 𝑛) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝛼𝜏𝑛),

the firm’s first-order condition with respect to 𝜏 𝑛 has the additional constant
term 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 𝛼. This, however, is immaterial for our results.

41 This assumption keeps investor trading incentives and the value of high
effort to the firm unchanged with respect to the parameter 𝛽. Thus, 𝛽
exclusively affects how the value of price informativeness to firms interacts
with project duration.

42 The contract allows for different payments conditional on early and late

success, but these are the same under the optimal contract.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388413J. Dow et al.

addition, managers’ impatience or short horizon diminishes the value
of repeated signals from long-term projects as only a fraction of those
signals can be used for managerial compensation.

6. Extension: Introducing a fraction of long-term investors

A recent trend among some investment managers is to pursue
long-term value, often as part of an ESG commitment. For example,
in a joint statement in March 2020, large public investors including
Japan’s GPIF (Government Pension Investment Fund), CALSTRS (Cali-
fornia State Teachers’ Retirement System) and the UK’s USS Investment
Management, wrote ‘‘asset managers that only focus on short-term,
explicitly financial measures, and ignore longer-term sustainability-
related risks and opportunities are not attractive partners for us’’.43
From our results above (Proposition 7), we know that if all investors
have longer horizons, the short-termism trap will be mitigated. But
what if only a subset of investors commit to long horizons?

Our results in this section are that long-term investing has no impact
on project maturity until it exceeds a critical mass. Even though long-
term investors shun short-termist firms, other investors can simply fill
that void. This is in line with recent empirical findings that the impact
of ESG investing on firms’ cost of capital is too small to have any
meaningful impact (Berk and van Binsbergen, 2021). On the other
hand, if the mass of long-term investors is sufficiently large that they
are marginal investors for all firms, project maturity reverts to the coor-
dinated benchmark and the short-termism trap disappears. In between,
there is an intermediate case. When the mass of long-term investors is
in this intermediate range, firms choose different project maturities to
cater to different investor clienteles. In this case, some firms choose
fairly long-term projects and are held by long-term investors, while
other choose shorter-term projects and are held by short-term investors.
This is only a partial solution to the liquidity trap however, in the
sense that even the longer term projects are shorter than those in the
coordinated benchmark, and shareholder value is not as high.

Suppose that a fraction 𝜇 of ‘‘long-term investors’’ stay in the
economy until 𝑡 = 2 (i.e., until all projects pay off). The remaining
fraction 1 − 𝜇 are ‘‘short-term investors’’ who may exit the economy in
𝑡 = 1 with probability 𝛾, as in our original model. For simplicity, we
focus on parameter values such that all firms list in the original model.
We first investigate parameter values for which the equilibrium is
symmetric. Denoting the equilibrium project maturity by 𝜏𝜇, we have

Proposition 8 (Symmetric Equilibrium with Long-Term Investors). (i)
There exists 𝜇∗ ∈ (0, 1∕𝑁) such that (a) for 𝜇 ≤ 𝜇∗, there is a unique
symmetric equilibrium and 𝜏𝜇 = 𝜏∗ (i.e., equilibrium is identical to the one
without long-term investors in Theorem 1); (b) For 𝜇 ∈ (𝜇∗, 1∕𝑁), if a
symmetric equilibrium exists, the equilibrium project maturity is 𝜏𝜇 = 𝜏∗.
(ii) For 𝜇 ≥ 1 − 1∕𝑁, there is a unique symmetric equilibrium and 𝜏𝜇 =
𝜏𝐶𝐵, i.e., equilibrium project maturity is the same as in the coordinated
benchmark. (iii) For 𝜇 ∈ [1∕𝑁, 1−1∕𝑁), there is no symmetric equilibrium.

Proof. See Appendix G.

■

Proposition 8-(i) shows that long-term investors have no impact
on project duration if their mass is smaller than the threshold 1 −
1∕𝑁. Intuitively, when the mass of long-term investors is sufficiently
small, short-term investors are marginal for all firms. Each firm’s price
informativeness is determined by short-term investors’ indifference
condition as in Eq. (11). Hence, the project maturity in a symmetric
equilibrium is the same as in the case without long-term investors.

Proposition 8-(ii) shows that when the mass of long-term investors
is larger than the threshold, they eliminates the race to the bottom in
project duration. Intuitively, when the mass of long-term investors is
sufficiently large, they become the marginal investors. Because long-
term investors’ trading profits do not depend on project maturity, a
firm’s project maturity has no impact on its price informativeness. As
a result, equilibrium project maturity with a sufficiently large mass of
long-term investors is the same as in the coordinated benchmark, and
therefore the equilibrium is constrained efficient (Section 5.3).

The intuition for Proposition 8-(iii) is as follows. Consider a candi-
date symmetric equilibrium 𝜏𝜇. For intermediate values of 𝜇, if firm
𝑛 deviates to a longer project maturity, there are enough long-term
investors to step in and sustain the same level of price informativeness
as in all other firms, even though short-term investors no longer invest
in firm 𝑛. Therefore, for all 𝜏𝜇 < 𝜏𝐶𝐵, a firm can profitably lengthen
its project maturity without a reduction in price informativeness. At
the same time, if firm 𝑛 deviates to a shorter project maturity, there
are enough short-term investors to sustain higher price informativeness
for firm 𝑛 even though long-term investors do not invest in this firm.
Therefore, for all 𝜏𝜇 > 𝜏∗, a firm can increase its value by shortening its
project maturity and increasing its price informativeness. Because 𝜏∗ <
𝜏𝐶𝐵 (Theorem 2), there is no symmetric equilibrium in the intermediate
region for 𝜇.

When the mass of long-term investors is in an intermediate range,
however, we can show that there is a ‘‘clientele equilibrium’’ in which
firms choose different maturities (i.e., some choose short-term whereas
others choose long-term). The following proposition summarizes this
result:

Proposition 9 (Clientele Equilibrium). For 1 − (𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧 < 𝜇 < 1 − 1∕𝑁,
there exists a clientele equilibrium in which a fraction 𝛼𝑆 of firms choose
maturity 𝜏𝑆 and a fraction 1 − 𝛼𝑆 of firms choose maturity 𝜏𝐿 where
0 < 𝛼𝑆 < 1 and 𝜏∗ < 𝜏𝑆 < 𝜏𝐿 < 𝜏𝐶𝐵. In this equilibrium, short-
term investors invest in short-term firms whereas long-term investors invest
in long-term firms. Price efficiency for short- and long-term firms satisfies
𝜆𝐿 < 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) < 𝜆𝑆 . Equilibrium shareholder value, 𝑆𝐶𝑙, satisfies 𝑆∗ <
𝑆𝐶𝑙 < 𝑆𝐶𝐵.

Proof. See Appendix G.

■

For analytical simplicity, the proof of Proposition 9 ignores the
integer constraint on the number of firms in each group. The clientele
equilibrium in Proposition 9 has the following important features.

First, ex-ante identical firms choose different project maturities
to cater to different investor clienteles. Hence, firms become ex-post
heterogeneous in equilibrium: long-term firms become more productive
than short-term firms, but attract less investor attention. Thus, long-
term firms have less informative prices and face higher agency cost
compared to short-term firms.

Second, long-term firms choose shorter project maturities and have
lower price efficiency compared to the coordinated benchmark, while
short-term firms choose longer project maturities and have higher price
efficiency compared to the equilibrium in the absence of long-term
investors. Each firm must have no incentive to deviate to the other
type. For this to happen, long-term firms must be sufficiently less
valuable than in the coordinated benchmark, and short-term firms must
be sufficiently more valuable than in the absence of long-term investors.

7. Empirical and policy implications

7.1. Salary caps

43 ‘‘Joint statement on the importance of long-term, sustainable growth’’at

https://www.gpif.go.jp/en/investment/Our_Partnership_for_Sustainable_
Capital_Markets_Signatories.pdf

It has been suggested that short-termism goes hand in hand with
excessive incentive compensation for CEOs (see, for example, Porter,
1992). Limits to CEO compensation have been proposed as a mecha-
nism to improve the management of listed companies. For example, in

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388414J. Dow et al.

1993 the Clinton administration introduced a salary cap on CEO com-
pensation in the form of $1 million deductibility cap (see Murphy, 2013
for further details). Can a salary cap promote shareholder value by mit-
igating excessive short-termism? Since the level of salary is not directly
related to project duration, a salary cap does not necessarily lengthen
project duration. Indeed, in our model the effect of a salary cap, at
the margin, is to reduce project duration. More broadly, although high
salaries and short-termism are often considered problematic, they are
two different phenomena and addressing one does not solve the other.
We use the same setup of our model as in Section 3, except we
assume an upper bound ̄𝑤 on managerial compensation in each state.
In that case, the optimal contracting problem defined in Eqs. (13)–(17)
needs to be augmented by an extra constraint:

𝑤𝑛

𝐺, 𝑤𝑛

𝐵, 𝑤𝑛

𝑆 , 𝑤𝑛

𝐹 , 𝑤𝑛

∅

≤ ̄𝑤.

(43)

We focus on values of the salary cap ̄𝑤 that ensures that the IC con-
straint with effort holds. For notational convenience, we use a double
asterisk notation (∗∗) for the optimal solution under the salary cap, and
use a single asterisk notation (∗) for the optimal solution without the
salary cap.

𝐺, 𝑤∗
Proposition 10. Suppose that the equilibrium contract is given by 𝑤∗
𝑆
without a salary cap. Then, given the number of listed firms 𝑁, the
equilibrium contract under salary cap is given by

𝐺, ̄𝑤),

𝑤∗∗

𝐺 = min(𝑤∗
𝑤∗
⎧
𝑆
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝑆 =

𝑢−1

(

𝑤∗∗

𝐾− 1
𝑁 ̄𝑧
)

1− 1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

(

)

𝛥𝜎𝑢( ̄𝑤)

(1−𝛿𝜏∗∗)𝛥𝜌

if 𝑤∗

𝐺 < ̄𝑤

otherwise,

where 𝜏∗∗ solves the following first-order condition of each firm’s maturity
choice problem under salary cap:

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗∗) =𝛩(𝜏∗∗)

[

(

𝜎𝐻

𝑤∗∗

𝐺 −

)

𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌

𝑢(𝑤∗∗
𝐺 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗∗
𝑆 )

]
1 − 𝛿𝜏∗∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗
(
𝑆 )

− 𝜌𝐻

(

1 −

−

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗
𝑆 ).

(44)

Maturity becomes shorter (i.e., 𝜏∗∗ < 𝜏∗) when the salary cap starts binding,
and shareholder value is reduced.

Proof. See Appendix H.

■

Thus, Proposition 10 shows that the marginal impact of a salary
cap does not prevent short-termism but rather promotes it. This is
because a binding salary cap reduces stock price-based compensation
and induces firms to increase compensation conditional on successful
project outcome (a smaller payment) instead. Eq. (H.10) shows that this
increases firms’ incentives to gain price informativeness by shortening
project maturity. The overall effect in equilibrium is to reduce project
duration and shareholder value.

7.2. Further testable implications

In this section, we discuss the empirical implications of our model.
There is a large empirical literature showing that stock-based compen-
sation can lead to value-destroying short-termism (e.g., Bergstresser
and Philippon, 2006; Gopalan et al., 2014; Asker et al., 2015; Bro-
chet et al., 2015). On a broad level, our paper investigates this well-
documented connection between stock-based compensation and cor-
porate short-termism through the lens of imperfect information in
financial markets. The main idea of our model is that short-termism
is an optimal response of firms to minimize their agency cost when
prices are informative, but those individually optimal responses lead
to an aggregate inefficiency through informational externalities. This

mechanism sheds light on some empirical regularities that are not fully
explained, and furthermore offers several testable implications.

First, higher competition can exacerbate short-termism through the
channel of price informativeness (Proposition 5). Furthermore, this link
between competitive pressure and short-termism should be present only
in the presence of informational externalities. Proposition 5 highlights
an important aspect of our prediction that firm value is destroyed due
to short-termism even when price informativeness stays the same. As
is discussed in Section 5.4.1, however, there has been a long debate
whether competitive pressure improves firm value or destroys firm
value. On the one hand, competition among firms can make firms more
efficient (e.g., Porter, 1990). On the other hand, competition among
firms can sometimes lead to a negative consequence such as reduced
innovations (e.g., Aghion et al., 2005). In particular, competitive pres-
sure can make firms focus on short-term performance, destroying their
long-term value (e.g., Pathan et al., 2021; Keum, 2021).

One of the distinct predictions of our model is that firms’ maturi-
ties are endogenously determined given the degree of informational
externalities. A shock that shortens the duration of one firm’s cash
flows should increase that firm’s price informativeness at the expense
of other firms; the intensity of this reaction measures the strength of
information externalities. Although such measure may be difficult to
construct empirically, the degree of informational externalities can be
associated with the magnitude of price sensitivities to new information,
which can be measured, for example, by ‘‘earnings response coefficient’’
(Ball and Brown, 1968; Dhaliwal et al., 1991). Our model predicts
that short-termism will be more severe when the sensitivity is higher.
Such a measure will allow us to distinguish between different mech-
anisms; the relation between competition and short-termism will be
positive only when there are informational externalities. Our prediction
is broadly consistent with Asker et al. (2015) who empirically find that
short-termist pressure is more severe for public firms in which stock
prices are most sensitive to earnings news (i.e., high earnings response
coefficients).

Second, more severe investor short-termism can lead to greater cor-
porate short-termism (Proposition 6). Furthermore, this effect should
be more severe in the presence of informational externalities. Al-
though it is often argued that investor myopia is responsible for
corporate short-termism, empirical evidence seems to be mixed. On
the one hand, short-horizoned institutional investors force managers
into value-destroying short-horizoned decision making (e.g., Jacobs,
1991; Latham and Braun, 2010; Callen and Fang, 2013; Agarwal et al.,
2018; Kim et al., 2019). For example, Bushee (1998) finds that a large
proportion of ownership with high turnover and momentum trading
increases the probability that managers will reduce R&D investment
to reverse an earnings decline. On the other hand, short-horizoned
institutional investors offer better disciplining as well as useful infor-
mation (e.g., Hansen and Hill, 1991; Yan and Zhang, 2009; Giannetti
and Yu, 2021). Our model provides one way to resolve such mixed ob-
servations: investor myopia would not directly translate into corporate
short-termism unless informational externalities are present. That is,
our model predicts that the relation between investor short-termism
and corporate short-termism will be positive only when there are
informational externalities. Our prediction is consistent with evidence
by Agarwal et al. (2018) who show that frequent portfolio disclosures
can induce increased short-term focus of fund managers, which in turn
creates pressure on managers of investee firms to behave myopically.

Third, more severe managerial myopia can lead to greater cor-
porate short-termism (Proposition 7). Furthermore, this effect should
be more severe in the presence of informational externalities. Empir-
ical evidence indeed shows that short-horizoned CEOs tend to avoid
value-enhancing long-term investments (e.g., Dechow and Sloan, 1991;
Gopalan et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2018; Lundstrum, 2002). As is shown

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388415J. Dow et al.

in Section 5.2.1, managerial myopia can still affect corporate short-
termism regardless informational externalities. But informational exter-
nalities amplify the effect of managerial myopia because firms compete
for the benefit of informed trading. This mechanism is broadly con-
sistent with empirical findings that stock-based CEO compensation is
more tightly connected to corporate short-termism when prices are
more sensitive to news (Asker et al., 2015).

Fourth, a decrease in informed trading can lead to more severe
short-termism (see the discussion after Proposition 6). There is a vast
literature on the impact of business cycles on financial markets. In
particular, a downturn in business cycles can reduce the participation
of sophisticated institutional investors by tightening their funding con-
straints (e.g., Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009), thus reduce informed
trading (e.g., Dow and Han, 2018; Dow et al., 2021). Based on such
observations, our model suggests that, during economic downturns,
it is likely that short-termism is exacerbated by firms’ competition
to accommodate more informed trading. This is in line with empiri-
cal findings which show that long-term value creation is often more
difficult to implement during economic downturns (e.g., Nanda and
Nicholas, 2014).

Finally, it is often argued that the stock market imposes an excessive
focus on short-term financial outcomes for publicly traded companies.
Therefore, the argument asserts that going private enables firms to
escape the short-termist pressure imposed by the stock market and
attain greater freedom to concentrate on long-term growth and in-
novation.44 In support of this, Asker et al. (2015) find that private
firms are less subject to short-termist pressure than public firms. As
a result, private firms tend to invest more and also produce more
distinctive innovations than equivalent public firms (e.g., Davies et al.,
2014; Bernstein, 2015). Our model provides a theoretical perspective
supporting these arguments. Theorem 1 shows investor short-termism
fosters a race-to-the-bottom among firms, where the associated costs
can outweigh the benefits of price informativeness. Consequently, some
firms opt to remain private.

8. Conclusion

In this paper, we explore whether managerial stock-price based
compensation leads to excessive short-termism. In previous models,
firms’ and managers’ prioritizing of short-term results as an individ-
ually rational response to short-term pressure from the stock market
is also collectively rational, in other words it is efficient given the
informational constraints that govern managerial incentives and project
selection.

In contrast, we study short-termism that is individually rational,
but collectively suboptimal. We study an economy with a stock market
where informed investors have short-horizons. Regardless of investors’
horizons, stock-based compensation can improve shareholder value of
an individual firm by reducing agency cost because stock prices are
informative about future cash flows. This allows the firm to pursue
longer term projects without impairing incentives.

Because price informativeness is endogenous, however, competition
for informed trading can destroy shareholder value as a result of nega-
tive externalities to price informativeness of other firms. Firms compete

44 For example, in a letter to Tesla employees in August 7, 2018, Tesla CEO
Elon Musk motivated the intention to take Tesla private on the basis that ‘‘
As a public company, we are subject to wild swings in our stock price that
can be a major distraction for everyone working at Tesla, all of whom are
shareholders. Being public also subjects us to the quarterly earnings cycle that
puts enormous pressure on Tesla to make decisions that may be right for a
given quarter, but not necessarily right for the long-term’’. He further added
‘‘ Basically, I’m trying to accomplish an outcome where Tesla can operate at
its best, free from as much distraction and short-term thinking as possible’’.
https://www.tesla.com/blog/taking-tesla-private

for informed investors by reducing project maturities because informed
investors are short-horizoned. Negative spillover effects arise but firms
do not internalize such adverse effects to other firms. Therefore, a
short-termism trap arises in equilibrium; firms reduce their maturity
excessively, thereby reducing shareholder value.

This is similar to the ‘‘race to the bottom’’ described by U.S. Supreme
Court Justice Louis Brandeis, in which states designed regulations to
compete for firms, which were attracted to incorporate in ‘‘states where
the cost was lowest and the laws least restrictive ... The race was one
not of diligence, but of laxity’’. (Liggett Co. v. Lee, 288 U.S. 517, 558–59
(1933), dissenting opinion). It has been used to describe competition
among stock exchanges by choice of listing regulations (Chemmanur
and Fulghieri, 2006), and competition among jurisdictions by choice
of tax rates (Mast, 2020).

This paper is part of a broader research project exploring the impact
of limited informed investor capital on stock market performance (Dow
and Han, 2018; Dow et al., 2021). Informed trading helps stock markets
to perform their economic functions, and shortages of informed capital
can disrupt those functions.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

James Dow: Writing – original draft. Jungsuk Han: Writing –

original draft. Francesco Sangiorgi: Writing – original draft.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have not received any financial sup-
port for the research described in this paper, and they also have
no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper.

Data availability

‘‘The Short-Termism Trap: Catering to Informed Investors with L
imited Horizons (Supplementary Data and Code)’’ (Original data)
(Mendeley Data)

Appendix A

Proof of Lemma 1.

In our model, because all stock payoffs and signals are jointly
independent, there is no learning across stocks in the market. Therefore,
we can analyze market makers’ learning informed investors’ private
information for each stock 𝑛 ∈  separately.

Let 𝑔(𝑧𝑛) be the probability density function of noise trading 𝑧𝑛.
Because 𝑧𝑛 is uniformly distributed on [− ̄𝑧, ̄𝑧], we have 𝑔(𝑧𝑛) = 1∕(2 ̄𝑧)
for 𝑧𝑛 ∈ [− ̄𝑧, ̄𝑧] and 𝑔(𝑧𝑛) = 0 otherwise. By Bayes’ Rule, market makers’
posterior belief that 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺 conditional on aggregate order flow 𝑋𝑛(0)
is given by45

𝑃 𝑟(𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺|𝑋𝑛(0)) =

𝜎𝐻 𝑔(𝑋𝑛(0) − 𝜇𝑛)
𝜎𝐻 𝑔(𝑋𝑛(0) − 𝜇𝑛) + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )𝑔(𝑋𝑛(0) + 𝜇𝑛)

.

(A.1)

From Eq. (A.1), it is immediate that

𝑃 𝑟(𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺|𝑋𝑛(0)) =

0

𝜎𝐻
1

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

if −𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑋𝑛(0) < 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧
if 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑋𝑛(0) ≤ −𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧
if −𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧 < 𝑋𝑛(0) ≤ 𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧.

(A.2)

45 See, for example, Lemma 1 in Dow et al. (2021) for a similar analysis
with uniformly-distributed noise trading, and also Lemma 4 in Dow and Han
(2018) for an analysis with noise trading under general distributions.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388416J. Dow et al.

Given 𝜏𝑛 (firm 𝑛’s maturity choice) the posterior belief about the
liquidation value conditional on private information 𝑠𝑛 is

[𝑉 𝑛

E

]
|𝑋𝑛(0)

= 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) +

∑

𝑠𝑛∈{𝐺,𝐵}

𝑃 𝑟(𝑅 = 𝛥𝑉 |𝑠𝑛)𝑃 𝑟(𝑠𝑛

|𝑋𝑛(0))𝛥𝑉 ,

whereas the expected value from a buy order conditional on 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵 is

(1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))

[

1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1)) − (1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))(1 − 𝛾)

] 𝐸[𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑃 𝑛

∅ |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵].

(A.6)

which implies,46

Subtracting (A.6) from (A.5) gives

[𝑉 𝑛

E

]
|𝑋𝑛(0)

=

𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐵𝛥𝑉
𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉
𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐺𝛥𝑉

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

if −𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑋𝑛(0) < 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧
if 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑋𝑛(0) ≤ −𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧
if −𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧 < 𝑋𝑛(0) ≤ 𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧.

(A.3)

Now, we derive the price informativeness for stock 𝑛. From
Eq. (A.2), it is clear that prices are informative except when 𝜇𝑛 − ̄𝑧 ≤
𝑋𝑛(0) ≤ −𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧. In case 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐻, we have 𝑋𝑛(0) = 𝜇𝑛 + 𝑧𝑛. Then, prices
are uninformative if − ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑧𝑛 ≤ −2𝜇𝑛 + ̄𝑧, which occurs with probability
1 − 𝜇𝑛∕ ̄𝑧. In case 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐿, we have 𝑋𝑛(0) = 𝜇𝑛 + 𝑧𝑛. Then, prices are
uninformative if 2𝜇𝑛− ̄𝑧 ≤ 𝑧𝑛 ≤ ̄𝑧, which occurs with probability 1−𝜇𝑛∕ ̄𝑧.
Therefore, prices are informative with probability 𝜇𝑛∕ ̄𝑧 regardless of
■
signals.

Proof of Lemma 2. We rewrite the value function 𝐽 𝑛
Eq. (9) in a more general form as follows:

0 (𝑠𝑛) given 𝑠𝑛 in

𝐽 𝑛
0

≡ 𝜎𝐻 𝐽 𝑛

0 (𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺) + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )𝐽 𝑛

0 (𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵),

(A.4)

where

𝐽 𝑛
0 (𝑠𝑛) ≡

and

− 𝐸[𝑃 𝑛(0)|𝑠𝑛]𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0) + 𝛾𝛤 𝑛(𝑠𝑛)𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0)

max
𝑥𝑛
𝑖 (0)∈{−1,0,1}
+ (1 − 𝛾)E[𝐽 𝑛

1 (𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (0), 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0))|𝑠𝑛],

𝛤 𝑛(𝑠𝑛) ≡ (1 − 𝜏𝑛)E[𝑉 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛] + 𝜏𝑛E[𝑃 𝑛(1)|𝑠𝑛],

and

𝜏𝑛E[(𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑃 𝑛(1))|𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)]𝑥𝑛

𝑖 (1);

1 (0, 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) ≡
𝐽 𝑛

max
𝑥𝑛
𝑖 (1)∈{−1,0,1}
𝐽 𝑛
1 (1, 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) ≡ (1 − 𝜏𝑛)E[𝑉 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛]
+ 𝜏𝑛 max{𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
1 (−1, 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) ≡ −(1 − 𝜏𝑛)E[𝑉 𝑛
𝐽 𝑛
− 𝜏𝑛 min{𝐸[𝑉 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛], 𝐸[𝑃 𝑛(1)|𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)]};
|𝑠𝑛]
|𝑠𝑛], 𝐸[𝑃 𝑛(1)|𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)]}
In this formulation, the value 𝐽 𝑛
𝑖 , 𝑠𝑛, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) accounts for the possibil-
ity that a late-consumer with a non-zero position in 𝑡 = 0 may reverse
the position in 𝑡 = 1 instead of holing the position until 𝑡 = 2.

1 (𝑥𝑛

First, we show that a long position conditional on a good signal
dominates a long position conditional on a bad signal. This is obvious
in 𝑡 = 1 since, conditional on 𝑃 𝑛(0) being non-revealing, the expected
payoff from a long position given a good signal is

E[𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑃 𝑛(1)|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺, 𝑃 𝑛(0)] = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))𝐸[𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑃 𝑛

∅ |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺]
= (1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))(𝜈𝐺 − 𝜌(𝑒𝑛))𝛥𝑉 > 0,

where the inequality is due to Eq. (3). Likewise, the expected payoff
from a long position given a bad signal is

E[𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑃 𝑛(1)|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺, 𝑃 𝑛(0)] = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))𝐸[𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑃 𝑛

∅ |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵]
= (1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))(𝜈𝐵 − 𝜌(𝑒𝑛))𝛥𝑉 < 0.

In 𝑡 = 0, the expected value from a buy order conditional on 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺 is

(1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1)))𝐸[𝑉 𝑛 − 𝑃 𝑛

∅ |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺],

(A.5)

(1 − 𝜆𝑛(0)) (1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))) (𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
− (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))(1 − 𝛾)𝐸[𝑃 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵])

|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺] − 𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵],
|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺] > 𝑃 𝑛
∅

∅ − 𝑉 𝑛
which is strictly positive since 𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
and (1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛
(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))) > (1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))(1 − 𝛾). A similar argument shows that a
short position conditional on a bad signal dominates a short position
conditional on a good signal.

Since informed investors always trade in the direction of their
signal, an informed investor with a long position in 𝑡 = 0 must have
received a good signal. If this investor consumes late and 𝑃 𝑛(0) is non-
revealing, it is strictly optimal to hold the position until 𝑡 = 2 because
|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺] > 𝐸[𝑃 𝑛(1)|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺, 𝑃 𝑛(0)]. Therefore, 𝐽 𝑛
1 (1, 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) =
𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺]. A similar argument shows that 𝐽 𝑛
𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
1 (−1, 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵, 𝑃 𝑛(0)) =
−𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵]. This shows that if the firm’ project pays off late and
𝑃 𝑛(0) is non-revealing, late-consumers hold the position until 𝑡 = 2.

̂𝐽 𝑛
1 (𝐺) say, as

|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺] − 𝑃 𝑛
∅ ).

Next, we prove that an informed investor prefers trading early.
Consider the expected value from a long position at 𝑡 = 0 conditional
on a good signal. Using Lemma 1 and Eq. (9) and simplifying, we can
̂𝐽 𝑛
write this value,
0 say, as
̂𝐽 𝑛
0 (𝐺) = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1)))(𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
On the other hand, consider the expected value at 𝑡 = 0 of trading at
𝑡 = 1 conditional on a good signal. Using Lemma 1 and Eq. (9) and
simplifying, we can write this value,
̂𝐽 𝑛
1 (𝐺) = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝛾)𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1))(𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
Therefore, we have
̂𝐽 𝑛
0 (𝐺) − ̂𝐽 𝑛
1 (𝐺), with a strict inequality if 𝜏𝑛(1 −
which implies that
𝜆𝑛(1)) < 1. Likewise, the results are identical because the difference
of values of trading at 𝑡 = 0 and trading at 𝑡 = 1 conditional on a bad
signal is given by
0 (𝐵) − ̂𝐽 𝑛
̂𝐽 𝑛
which implies that
𝜆𝑛(1)) < 1.

∅ − 𝐸[𝑉 𝑛
1 (𝐵), with a strict inequality if 𝜏𝑛(1 −

1 (𝐵) = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1)))(𝑃 𝑛
0 (𝐵) ≥ ̂𝐽 𝑛
̂𝐽 𝑛

1 (𝐺) = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1)))(𝐸[𝑉 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺] − 𝑃 𝑛
∅ ).

|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺] − 𝑃 𝑛
∅ ),

0 (𝐺) ≥ ̂𝐽 𝑛
̂𝐽 𝑛

|𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵]),

Since it is optimal for informed investors to buy (sell) at 𝑡 = 0
conditional on a good (bad) signal, there is an equilibrium in which
all informed investors trade at 𝑡 = 0. In this equilibrium, the aggregate
order flow at 𝑡 = 1 is proportional to order flow in the previous
period, i.e., 𝑋𝑛(1) = −𝛾𝑋𝑛(0). Because 𝑋𝑛(0) is already known to
market makers, there is no new information for market makers in 𝑋𝑛(1).
Therefore, the price is uninformative at 𝑡 = 1, that is, 𝜆𝑛(1) = 0. In this
equilibrium, the value of trading stock 𝑛 given a good signal is
̂𝐽 𝑛
0 (𝐺) = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝛥𝑃𝐺,
where 𝛥𝑃𝐺 is the mispricing wedge given 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺 such that

𝛥𝑃𝐺

≡ 𝑃 𝑛

𝐺 − 𝑃 𝑛

∅ = (𝜈𝐺 − 𝜌𝐻 )𝛥𝑉 ,

and the value of trading stock 𝑛 given a bad signal is
̂𝐽 𝑛
0 (𝐵) = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝛥𝑃𝐵,
where 𝛥𝑃𝐵 is the mispricing wedge given 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵 such that

𝛥𝑃𝐵

≡ 𝑃 𝑛

∅ − 𝑃 𝑛

𝐵 = (𝜌𝐻 − 𝜈𝐵)𝛥𝑉 .

46 To see this, 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅 = 𝛥𝑉 |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺) × 0 + 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅 = 𝛥𝑉 |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵) × 1 = 𝜈𝐵, 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅 =
𝛥𝑉 |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺) × 𝜎𝐻 + 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅 = 𝛥𝑉 |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵) × (1 − 𝜎𝐻 ) = 𝜌𝐻 due to the first equation
in Eq. (3) and finally 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅 = 𝛥𝑉 |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐺) × 1 + 𝑃 𝑟(𝑅 = 𝛥𝑉 |𝑠𝑛 = 𝐵) × 0 = 𝜈𝐺.

Therefore, the value of trading stock 𝑛 before acquiring a signal is equal
to

𝐽 𝑛
0 = 𝜎𝐻

0 (𝐺) + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 ) ̂𝐽 𝑛
̂𝐽 𝑛

0 (𝐵) = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝛥𝑃 ,

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388417J. Dow et al.

where 𝛥𝑃 is a constant such that

𝛥𝑃 ≡ 𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝑃𝐺 + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )𝛥𝑃𝐵 =

[𝜎𝐻 (𝜈𝐺 − 𝜌𝐻 ) + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )(𝜌𝐻 − 𝜈𝐵)

] 𝛥𝑉

Finally, we prove this is the only trading equilibrium. Consider a
candidate equilibrium in which a mass 𝜂𝑛 > 0 of informed investors
does not trade at 𝑡 = 0 and waits to trade in 𝑡 = 1. For this trading
behavior to be optimal, it must be ̂𝐽 𝑛
1 (𝑠𝑛), which requires
𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝜆𝑛(1)) = 1 and therefore 𝜆𝑛(1) = 0. However, when a mass
𝜂𝑛(1 − 𝛾) > 0 of informed investors trades at 𝑡 = 1, the order flow at
𝑡 = 1 must be informative, which implies 𝜆𝑛(1) > 0, a contradiction.

0 (𝑠𝑛) ≤ ̂𝐽 𝑛

■

which proves that 𝜆𝑛 is concave in 𝜏𝑛.

Finally, we obtain

) 𝑥(𝜏𝑛)𝛾 [𝑥(𝜏𝑚)]2
]2

[∑

𝑚 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

> 0.

(A.11)

■

𝜕𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑚 =

( 𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1
̄𝑧

Appendix B

We begin with a preliminary lemma.

Proof of Proposition 1. Let 𝛬 > 0 be

𝛬 = (1 − 𝜆𝑛)(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚)(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑚),

for all 𝑛, 𝑚 ∈  (see Eq. (11)). Then, we can write each 𝜆𝑛 as

𝜆𝑛 = 1 −

𝛬
1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛

.

Lemma B.3 (Implicit Function). Let the real-valued function 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦) defined
on the interval 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑥, ̄𝑥] × [𝑦, ̄𝑦] be continuous, increasing in 𝑥 and
decreasing (respectively, increasing) in 𝑦. Furthermore, assume that for any
𝑥 there is a unique 𝑦 such that 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 0. Then, 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 0 uniquely
defines a continuous, increasing (respectively, decreasing) function 𝑓 (𝑥)
such that 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑓 (𝑥)) = 0.

(A.7)

By adding Eq. (A.7) for all 𝑛 ∈  and using the informational resource
constraint Eq. (12), we can obtain

𝛬 =

𝑁 ̄𝑧−1
̄𝑧

∑𝑁

𝑛=1

1
1−𝛾𝜏𝑛

.

(A.8)

Therefore, there exists a unique solution for each 𝜆𝑛 for all 𝑛 ∈  given
{𝜏𝑛}𝑛∈ from Eqs. (A.7)–(A.8).

Now, we prove that, fixing {𝜏𝑚}𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}, 𝜆𝑛 is decreasing and con-
cave in 𝜏𝑛, where the notation 𝐵 ⧵ 𝐴 is the set difference, defined as
𝐵 ⧵ 𝐴 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝐵|𝑥 ∉ 𝐴}. For notational convenience, we represent
Eqs. (A.7)–(A.8) as follows:

𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛) = 1 −

𝑁 ̄𝑧−1
𝑥(𝜏𝑛)
̄𝑧
𝑚∈ 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)
where 𝑥(⋅) is a positive function such that

∑

,

𝑥(𝜏) ≡

1
1 − 𝛾𝜏

,

which is increasing in 𝜏 because

𝜕𝑥(𝜏)
𝜕𝜏

=

𝛾
(1 − 𝛾𝜏)2

= 𝛾 [𝑥(𝜏)]2 > 0.

(A.9)

Because 𝑥(𝜏) is increasing in 𝜏, 𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛) becomes the smallest when

𝜏𝑛 = 1 and 𝜏𝑚 = 0, in which case we have

𝜆𝑛(1) = 1 −

𝑁 ̄𝑧−1
̄𝑧

1
1−𝛾

1
1−𝛾

+ 𝑁 − 1

= 1 −

𝑁 − 1
̄𝑧
𝛾 + (1 − 𝛾)𝑁

.

Therefore, Eq. (4) is sufficient to guarantee that 𝜆𝑛(1) is positive.
The first-order derivative of 𝜆𝑛 with respect to 𝜏𝑛 is given by

𝜕𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛 = −𝐴 ×

𝛾 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]2

(
𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

)2

where 𝐴 is a positive constant such that

𝐴 ≡

( 𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1
̄𝑧

) ∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}

𝑥(𝜏𝑚).

< 0,

(A.10)

which proves that 𝜆𝑛 is decreasing in 𝜏𝑛.

Likewise, the second-order derivative of 𝜆𝑛 with respect to 𝜏𝑛 is

𝜕2𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2

= −𝐴

= −𝐴

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

2𝛾 2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]3 (
(
𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

)
𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

− 2𝛾 2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]4

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

)3

2𝛾 2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]3 ∑
(

𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)
)3

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

< 0,

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

Proof. The fact that for any 𝑥 there is a unique 𝑦 such that 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 0
implies the existence of a unique mapping 𝑓 ∶ [𝑥, ̄𝑥] → [𝑦, ̄𝑦] such that
𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑓 (𝑥)) = 0.

Consider the case where 𝐹 is decreasing in 𝑦. We show by contra-
diction that 𝑓 is increasing. Assume not. Then, for some 𝑥, 𝑥′ ∈ [𝑥, ̄𝑥]
such that 𝑥′ > 𝑥 we have 𝑓 (𝑥) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑥′) and therefore

0 = 𝐹 (𝑥′, 𝑓 (𝑥′)) ≥ 𝐹 (𝑥′, 𝑓 (𝑥)) > 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑓 (𝑥)) = 0

where the weak inequality follows because 𝐹 is decreasing in 𝑦, the
strict inequality follows because 𝐹 is increasing in 𝑥, and the equalities
follow by definition of 𝑓 . Hence, we have a contradiction. The case
where 𝐹 is increasing in 𝑦 is identical.

Next, we show by contradiction that 𝑓 is continuous on the in-
terior of 𝐼. Assume not. Then there exist a point 𝑥0, a value 𝜖 >
0 and a sequence {ℎ𝑛} converging to zero as 𝑛 → ∞ such that
≥ 𝜖 for every 𝑛 ∈ N. By construction, the sequence
|𝑓 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛) − 𝑓 (𝑥0)|
{𝑓 (𝑥0 +ℎ𝑛)} is bounded in [𝑦, ̄𝑦]. By the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, a
sequence bounded by an interval has a subsequence converging in that
} and a value 𝛼 ∈ [𝑦, ̄𝑦] such
interval. Thus, there is a subsequence {ℎ𝑛𝑘
≥ 𝜖 for every
that 𝑓 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘
𝑘 ∈ N, then 𝛼 ≠ 𝑓 (𝑥0). Since and (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘
)) → (𝑥0, 𝛼) as
)) → 𝐹 (𝑥0, 𝛼)
𝑘 → ∞ and 𝐹 is continuous, we have 𝐹 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘
)) = 0 for every 𝑘 ∈ N and
as 𝑘 → ∞. Since 𝐹 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘
, 𝑓 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘
𝐹 is continuous, it must be that 𝐹 (𝑥0, 𝛼) = 0. Since for each 𝑥 there
exists a unique value 𝑦 solving 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 0, it must be that 𝛼 = 𝑓 (𝑥0),
a contradiction. Right continuity at 𝑥 and left continuity at ̄𝑥 can be
shown in the same way, and the proof is omitted. ■

) → 𝛼 as 𝑘 → ∞. Since |𝑓 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘

) − 𝑓 (𝑥0)|
, 𝑓 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘

, 𝑓 (𝑥0 + ℎ𝑛𝑘

Proof of Proposition 2. Given the LL constraint in Eq. (17), the PC
constraint in Eq. (15) must not bind if the IC constraint in Eq. (16)
is satisfied. Thus, it must be 𝑤∗𝑛
= 0 (i.e., the LL
constraint binds for these states) and the IC constraint must bind, for
otherwise shareholders could reduce the wage bill without violating the
IC constraint. Hence, an optimal contract solves

𝐹 = 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐵 = 𝑤∗𝑛

∅

min
,𝑤𝑛

𝑆 }∈R2
+

{𝑤𝑛
𝐺

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝑆

such that the IC constraint (16) binds,
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝐺

)

𝑆

)

= 𝐾.

(B.1)

(B.2)

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

Now, we prove the following lemmas to finish the proof.

Lemma B.4. Eq. (3) implies 𝛥𝜎 > 𝛥𝜌, 𝜈𝐺 > 𝜈𝐵, and 𝜌𝐻 ∕𝛥𝜌 > 𝜎𝐻 ∕𝛥𝜎.

Proof. By taking the difference of two equations in Eq. (3), we have

𝛥𝜌 = 𝛥𝜎(𝜈𝐺 − 𝜈𝐵),

(B.3)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388418J. Dow et al.

which implies 𝛥𝜎 > 𝛥𝜌, and 𝜈𝐺 > 𝜈𝐵. Furthermore, Eq. (3) also implies
that
𝜌𝐻
𝛥𝜌

𝜎𝐻 (𝜈𝐺 − 𝜈𝐵)
𝛥𝜌

𝜈𝐵
𝛥𝜌

=

+

which in turn together with Eq. (B.3) implies
𝜌𝐻
𝛥𝜌

𝜎𝐻
𝛥𝜎

𝜎𝐻
𝛥𝜎

𝜈𝐵
𝛥𝜌

. □

=

+

>

Lemma B.5. There exists a unique solution for the optimization problem
in Eq. (B.1) such that 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 simultaneously
solve
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

𝑆 > 0 where 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛

= 𝐾

)

)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
(
𝑆
𝑆 ) = 𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻 𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 ).

(B.4)

Furthermore, both 𝑤∗𝑛
ing in 𝜏𝑛, 𝐾, 𝛿 and decreasing in 𝜆𝑛.

𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 are continuously differentiable and increas-

Proof. Because of the assumption that 𝑢′(0) = ∞, we can rule out any
corner solution such that either 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 = 0. Therefore, we
can drop non-negativity constraints for 𝑤𝑛
𝑆 . Then, the Lagrangian
is given by

𝐺 = 0 or 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺, 𝑤𝑛

intermediate value theorem implies that for all 𝜏𝑛, 𝛿, 𝜆𝑛, 𝐾 there exists
𝑆 solving Eq. (B.9), which in turn implies the same for 𝑤∗𝑛
a unique 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
by Eq. (B.7). Furthermore, 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 simultaneously solve Eqs. (B.4)
by construction.

𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛

For a given value of 𝑤∗𝑛

Next, we prove that both 𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 , the LHS of Eq. (B.9) is decreasing in 𝛿
and the RHS of Eq. (B.9) is increasing in 𝐾. Therefore, by Lemma B.3,
𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 is an increasing and continuous function of 𝛿 and 𝐾; since 𝑊 (⋅)
is increasing and continuous, so is 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 . Similarly, the LHS of Eq. (B.9)
𝐺 > 𝑊 (𝑤∗𝑛
is increasing in 𝜆𝑛 because 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 ) and 𝛥𝜎 > 𝛥𝜌 (Lemma B.4).
Therefore, by Lemma B.3, 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 is a decreasing and continuous function
of 𝜆𝑛; since 𝑊 (⋅) is increasing and continuous, so is 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 .
𝑆 increase in 𝜏𝑛. Note that
𝜏𝑛 enters Eq. (B.9) directly but also indirectly through 𝜆𝑛. For the
direct effect, the LHS of Eq. (B.9) is decreasing in 𝜏𝑛 at any level of
𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 (because 𝑢(⋅) is positive), whereas the RHS is a constant. For the
indirect effect, Proposition 1 implies that 𝜕𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛 < 0, and we previously
established that the LHS of Eq. (B.9) is increasing in 𝜆𝑛. Therefore, the
LHS of Eq. (B.9) is decreasing in 𝜏𝑛. Therefore, by Lemma B.3, 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 is
an increasing and continuous function of 𝜆𝑛; since 𝑊 (⋅) is increasing
and continuous, so is 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 .

𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛

Continuous differentiability of 𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 follows from continuous dif-
ferentiability of 𝑢(⋅), 𝑊 (⋅), 𝜆𝑛 and the Implicit Function Theorem. ■

𝐺 , 𝑤∗𝑛

 = 𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛
[

+ 𝜓

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝑆

𝐾 − 𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
−(1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

)

𝐺

)

𝑆

]

,

Lemma B.6. Under the optimal contract,  𝑛 is increasing in 𝜏𝑛.

Proof. At optimum, the following should be true:

where 𝜓 is the Lagrangian multiplier. The first-order conditions with
respect to 𝑤𝑛
𝜎𝐻 − 𝜓𝛥𝜎𝑢′ (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 and 𝑤𝑛
)

𝜌𝐻 − 𝜓𝛥𝜌𝑢′ (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 are given by

(B.5)

= 0,

= 0,

)

𝐺

𝑆

which implies

 𝑛 =𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛
)

𝑆

+ 𝜓 [𝐾 − 𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛

− (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛

)] .

𝑆

𝐺

Then, the Envelope theorem implies

𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

.

=

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

𝜎𝐻
𝜌𝐻
Therefore, we have 𝑤∗𝑛
(i.e., 𝑢′(⋅) > 0, 𝑢′′(⋅) < 0), and also 𝜌𝐻 ∕𝛥𝜌 > 𝜎𝐻 ∕𝛥𝜎 from Lemma B.4.

𝑆 because 𝑢′(⋅) is positive and decreasing

𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛

(B.6)

Using continuous differentiability and strict monotonicity of 𝑢′(⋅),
𝐺 using

𝑆 as a continuously differentiable function of 𝑤∗𝑛

we can obtain 𝑤∗𝑛
Eq. (B.6):

𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 = ̃𝑊 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) ≡ 𝑢′−1

( 𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

)

𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

,

(B.7)

𝐺 because both 𝑢′(⋅) and 𝑢′−1(⋅) are

𝑆 is increasing in 𝑤∗𝑛

which implies 𝑤∗𝑛
decreasing:47
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
The RHS in Eq. (B.7) is not defined for 𝑤∗𝑛

𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
) .
𝑢′′ (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆

𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

=

𝐺 = 0 if and only if 𝐾 = 0, in which case also 𝑤∗𝑛
̃𝑊 (⋅) for 𝑤∗𝑛

note that 𝑤∗𝑛
Therefore, we define the function 𝑊 (⋅) to equal
and 𝑊 (0) = 0. Since 0 < ̃𝑊 (𝑤∗𝑛
lim𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) < 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 ) = 0. Thus, 𝑊 (⋅) is right-continuous at zero.

𝐺 →0+ ̃𝑊 (𝑤∗𝑛
We can represent the IC constraint as

𝐺 for any 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 = 0. However, we
𝑆 = 0.
𝐺 > 0
𝐺 > 0, we have

𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

)

)
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑊 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

= 𝐾.

(B.9)

The LHS of Eq. (B.9) at 𝑤∗𝑛
0. The LHS is greater than 𝐾 as 𝑤∗𝑛
∞. Because the LHS is an increasing continuous function of 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 = 0 is zero because 𝑢(0) = 0 and 𝑊 (0) =
𝐺 → ∞ because lim𝑤→∞ 𝑢(𝑤) =
𝐺 , the

47 Due to strict concavity of 𝑢(⋅), it is immediate that 𝑢′(⋅) is decreasing. For

Likewise, 𝑢′−1(⋅) is decreasing because

𝜕𝑢′−1(𝑦)
𝜕𝑦

=

1
𝑢′′(𝑢′−1(𝑦))

< 0.

(B.8)

where

𝛹 (𝑤) ≡ 𝑤 −

𝑢(𝑤)
𝑢′(𝑤)

< 0,

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝜎𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝐺 −
𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

( 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) + (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿
𝜌𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
( 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) + (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿

+ 𝜓

)

)

− 𝜓

)

𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆

) .

(B.10)

Substituting the first-order conditions in Eq. (B.5) into Eq. (B.10), we
have

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =
=

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 ) −
[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

( 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) + (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿

)

𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

]
𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

− (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

(B.11)

(B.12)

which is a decreasing function because of the concavity of 𝑢(⋅):

𝛹 ′(𝑤) = 1 −

(𝑢′(𝑤)

)2

− 𝑢(𝑤)𝑢′′(𝑤)

(𝑢′(𝑤))2

=

Because 𝛹 (⋅) < 0, 𝛹 ′(⋅) < 0 and 𝑤∗𝑛
𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑢(𝑤)𝑢′′(𝑤)
(𝑢′(𝑤))2
𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛

< 0.

(B.13)

𝑆 (Lemma B.5), we have

𝐺 ) < 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 ) < 0.
We now claim that
𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
𝑆 )
𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )
𝐺 )

<

.

To see this, note that Eq. (B.14) is equivalent to

𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 )𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 )𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 ),

𝑆 ) > 𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
which is always true because 𝑤∗𝑛
decreasing in 𝑤 due to the concavity of 𝑢(⋅), i.e.,
]′
[𝑢′(𝑤)𝛹 (𝑤)

= 𝑢′′(𝑤)𝛹 (𝑤) + 𝑢′(𝑤)𝛹 ′(𝑤) = 𝑤𝑢′′(𝑤) < 0.

𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 (Lemma B.5) and 𝑢′(𝑤)𝛹 (𝑤) is

(B.14)

(B.15)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388419J. Dow et al.

Furthermore, Eq. (B.6), together with 𝛥𝜎 > 𝛥𝜌 (Lemma B.4), implies
that

Appendix C

𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻

<

𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

.

Therefore, Eqs. (B.14) and (B.16) imply that

𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻

<

𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

<

𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

,

which in turn proves that

𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 ) < 𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 ) < 0.

(B.16)

(B.17)

Because 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is negative (Proposition 1), Eq. (B.17) implies
that the first term in Eq. (B.11) is positive. Because 𝛹 (⋅) is negative
(Eq. (B.12)), the second term in Eq. (B.11) is also positive. Therefore
𝜕 𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is positive, which proves that  𝑛 is increasing in 𝜏𝑛. ■

Lemma B.7. Under the optimal contract,  𝑛 is convex in 𝜏𝑛.

Proof. From Eq. (B.11), we can obtain the second-order derivative of
 𝑛 with respect to 𝜏𝑛 as follows:

𝜕2 𝑛
(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2

=

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

+

+

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

]
𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
[

𝜎𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

𝑆 ) − (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜏𝑛 − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝜏𝑛

]

.

Because 𝜕2𝜆𝑛∕(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2 is negative (Proposition 1), Eq. (B.17) implies that
the first term in Eq. (B.18) is positive. Because 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is negative
(Proposition 1), and 𝛹 (⋅) is negative (Eq. (B.12)), the second term in
Eq. (B.18) is also positive. Because 𝛹 ′(⋅) is negative (Eq. (B.13)) and
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 ∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is positive (Lemma B.5), the third term is also positive.
Now, we prove that the fourth term in Eq. (B.18) is also positive.

Proof of Proposition 3. We define a mapping 𝛶 𝑛 ∶ [0, 1] → R as
follows:
𝛶 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) ≡ 𝜕 𝑛(𝜏𝑛)

= 𝑓 ′(𝜏𝑛) −

.

𝜕𝜏𝑛 −

𝜕 𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝜕 𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛

Then, 𝛶 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) = 0 is equivalent to the first-order condition in Eq. (22)
for the optimization problem in Eq. (21). Because 𝑓 is concave and  𝑛
is convex in 𝜏𝑛 (Proposition 2), 𝛶 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) is decreasing in 𝜏𝑛, i.e.,

𝜕𝛶 𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛

= 𝑓 ′′(𝜏∗𝑛) −

𝜕2 𝑛
(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2

< 0.

Furthermore, we have

𝛶 𝑛(0) = 𝑓 ′(0) −

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

|
|
|
|𝜏𝑛=0

< 0,

and 𝛶 𝑛(1) = 𝑓 ′(1) −

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

|
|
|
|𝜏𝑛=1

> 0.

because 𝑓 ′(0) = ∞ and 𝑓 ′(1) = 0, and 𝜕 𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is positive (Lemma B.6)
and finite for all 𝜏𝑛 ∈ [0, 1].48

Therefore the intermediate value theorem implies that the first-
order condition is satisfied (i.e., 𝛶 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) = 0) at an interior point 𝜏𝑛 ∈
(0, 1).

(B.18)

Proof of Proposition 4. We prove the proposition with a corollary of
the following lemma:

Lemma C.8 (Supermodularity). Consider the simultaneous move game
played by the 𝑁 firms when choosing the project maturity. Each firm chooses
𝜏𝑛 ∈ [0, 1] to maximize  𝑛(𝜏𝑛) −  𝑛(𝜏𝑛), where  𝑛(𝜏𝑛) is defined in the text
and  𝑛(𝜏𝑛) is the wage bill under the optimal contract given 𝜏𝑛 in Eq. (14).
This game is supermodular if either (i) (𝑁 − 1) (1 − 𝛾) ≥ 1, or if (ii) the
manager has CRRA utility, 𝑢 (𝑥) = 𝑥1−𝛼
, and 𝛼 ∈ ( ̄𝛼, 1), for some ̄𝛼 ∈ (0, 1).
1−𝛼

Proof. By the maximum theorem,  𝑛(𝜏𝑛) is continuous in 𝜏𝑛 and in 𝜏𝑚
for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}, and so are firms’ objective functions. The strategy
space is compact since 𝜏𝑛 ∈ [0, 1]. Therefore, the game is supermodular
if each firm’s objective function has increasing differences in maturity
choices, that is, for all 𝑛 and 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛},

𝜕2 ( 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) −  𝑛(𝜏𝑛))
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑚

≥ 0.

(C.1)

(B.19)

]

Since  𝑛(𝜏𝑛) is not a function of 𝜏𝑚 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}, (C.1) is
equivalent to

) 𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
)
𝑢′′ (𝑤∗𝑛

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌
)

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝑆
( 𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

)2]

𝜕2 𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑚

≤ 0.

By Eq. (B.11), we have:

]

< 0,

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝜕2 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑚 =

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑚
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

+

(B.20)

]
𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
(

𝜎𝐺𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

) 𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜆𝑛

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜆𝑛

]

.

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

(C.2)

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚

(C.3)

(C.4)

where the first equality is due to Eq. (B.19), the second equality is
due to Eq. (B.12), and the third equality is due to Eq. (B.6). Because
𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 ) (Lemma B.5) and 𝛥𝜌∕𝛥𝜎 < 1 (Lemma B.4), we have

𝐺 ) > 𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

)

( 𝛥𝜌
𝛥𝜎

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 ) > 0.

(B.21)

Then, the last inequality in Eq. (B.20) holds because 𝑢′′ < 0 and 𝑤∗𝑛
is positive (Lemma B.5).

𝑆 ∕𝜕𝜏𝑛

Finally, because 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is negative (Proposition 1), Eq. (B.20)

implies that the fourth term in Eq. (B.18) is positive.

Because all four terms in Eq. (B.18) are positive, the second-order
derivative of  𝑛 with respect to 𝜏𝑛 is positive, which finishes the proof
of strict convexity of  𝑛. ■

[

+

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚

𝛿𝜌𝐻

𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆 ) − (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

Using Eq. (B.6) we obtain
𝑢′′ (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝑢′′ (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆

𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝜎
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

=

)

)

.

48 Because the amounts of optimal compensation 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 and 𝑤∗𝑛
is immediate that 𝜕 𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is finite from Eqs. (A.10) and (B.11).

𝑆 are finite, it

Using Eq. (B.8) we obtain

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =

𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
)
𝑢′′ (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜏𝑛

.

Then, we have

𝜎𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜏 𝑛

=

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜏 𝑛 − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )
[

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝜏 𝑛

𝜎𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

( 𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻

= 𝜎𝐻

= 𝜎𝐻

𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
(𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
)2
𝐺 )
𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
)2
(𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜏 𝑛

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜏 𝑛

[

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

[

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

(

𝜌2
𝐻
𝜎2
𝐻
( 𝛥𝜌
𝛥𝜎

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388420J. Dow et al.

Using Eqs. (B.6) and implicit differentiation of Eq. (B.9) to compute
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜆𝑛 , after some straightforward manipulation we obtain
(

𝜎𝐺𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

) 𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

𝜕𝜆𝑛 = 𝛤

Corollary 1. Under the conditions in Lemma C.8, the best response 𝜏∗𝑛
in Proposition 3 is increasing in other firms’ maturity choices, that is,
𝜕𝜏∗𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚

> 0 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}.

)2

Proof. Increasing best responses is a standard property for supermod-
ular games (e.g., Topkis, 1998).

■

> 0.

)−1

Appendix D

where we define
(

𝜎𝐺

𝛤 ≡

(
𝑢

𝑢′

𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
(
𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
)−1

)
) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

)

)

(
𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
(
𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆

𝑢

𝑢′

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 𝑅 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚 > 0, 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝑤∗𝑛
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

𝑆 ) < 0,

Since 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝜆𝑛 < 0 (Lemma B.5), the third line in Eq. (C.3) is negative. Therefore,
for (C.2) to hold it is sufficient to show that

𝑆 ) < 0, 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛

> 0 (Eq. (C.4)) and

𝑆 𝑅 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆

+

𝛤 ≤ 0.

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 < 0, 𝜕𝜆𝑛

]
𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )
[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑚
Since 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚 > 0, 𝛤 > 0, and
(Eq. (B.17)), a sufficient condition for (C.5) is that
expression for 𝜆𝑛 in the proof of Proposition 1, we obtain
) 𝛾 2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑚)]2 (∑

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
] < 0
𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )
𝜕2𝜆𝑛
≥ 0. Using the
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑛

)
𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚) − 𝑥(𝜏𝑛)

(C.5)

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑚 =

( 𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1
̄𝑧

(∑

𝑚∈ 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

)3

.

(C.6)

Therefore

(

)

∑

𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛

= 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑚

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
Because 𝑥 (𝜏) is increasing, we have that ∑
(𝑁 − 1) 𝑥(0) ≥ 𝑥(1), which is equivalent to

⎞
𝑥(𝜏𝑚) − 𝑥(𝜏𝑛)
⎟
⎟
⎠
𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚) − 𝑥(𝜏𝑛) ≥ 0 if

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}

.

In the proof of Theorem 1, we show that the number of listed firms in
equilibrium must be such that 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) < 1, for otherwise listed firms’
shareholder value exceeds that of unlisted firms. Hence, Eq. (C.7) is
satisfied for

(1 − 𝛾) ≥ 1, as stated in Eq. (5) in the main text.

− 1

)

( 1
̄𝑧

As an alternative sufficient condition that does not depend on
investor preferences or the number of firms, we consider the case
where the manager has CRRA utility as stated in the lemma. With this
assumption, (C.5) can be rewritten as

(

𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 𝜂
1 − 𝛼

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑛 +

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚

𝜂

(1 − 𝛼)

(𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜉)

)

≤ 0,

(C.8)

where we define
)− 1
( 𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻
𝛼
𝛥𝜌𝜎𝐻

𝜉 =

𝜂 = 𝜎𝐻 − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜉.

We find that

lim
𝛼⟶1−

(1 − 𝛼)

𝜂

(𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜉) = ∞.
𝜕𝜏𝑛 , 𝜕𝜆𝑛

𝜕𝜏𝑚 , and 𝜕2𝜆𝑛

𝜕𝜏𝑚 < 0 and 𝜕𝜆𝑛

𝜕𝜆𝑛

Since 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
parameter 𝛼, we have

𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑛 do not depend on the

lim
𝛼⟶1−

Since
one.

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛𝜕𝜏𝑛 +
𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
1−𝛼
■

𝜂

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑚

(1 − 𝛼)

𝜂

(𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜉) = −∞.

> 0 for 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1), then (C.8) holds for 𝛼 sufficiently close to

The following corollary provides the proof of Proposition 4:

Proof of Theorem 1. We prove the theorem in three steps. As a first
step, we take the number of listed firms 𝑁 as given and we prove
the listed firms’ choice of project duration, managerial compensation,
and shareholder value in Eqs. (26)–(30). Step (ii) provides technical
lemmas. Step (iii) combines those lemmas to derive the threshold 𝛾 ∗
and its dependency on the parameter 𝐾.

Step (i). In this step, we focus on the listed firms’ equilibrium choices
taking the number 𝑁 of listed firms as given. First, we assume 𝑁 > 1∕ ̄𝑧.
This must be true in equilibrium, as shown below in Step (ii) of this
proof. Second, we note that payoff functions are symmetric and best
responses are increasing (Proposition 4). Therefore, listed firms’ project
maturity choices must be symmetric in any pure strategy equilibrium.
We proceed to show that such a symmetric choice of project maturity
exists and is unique.

In case of a symmetric project maturity choice, 𝜏𝑚 = 𝜏∗ for all
𝑚 ∈  , Eq. (A.10) implies that the sensitivity of price informativeness
to 𝜏𝑛, denoted by 𝛩(𝜏∗), is given by
𝛩(𝜏∗) ≡ 𝜕𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝛾(𝑁 − 1)(𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1)
𝑁 2 ̄𝑧(1 − 𝛾𝜏∗)

|
|
|
|𝜏𝑛=𝜏∗,𝜏𝑚=𝜏∗,∀𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}

(D.1)

< 0,

= −

which is decreasing in 𝜏∗ because

𝛾 2(𝑁 − 1)(𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1)
𝑁 2 ̄𝑧(1 − 𝛾𝜏∗)2

< 0.

(D.2)

𝐺(𝜏∗) and 𝑤∗

For clarity, throughout this proof, we denote 𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗) as
𝐺(𝜏∗) and 𝑤∗
functions of 𝜏∗ explicitly. 𝑤∗
𝑆 (𝜏∗) are the optimal compen-
sation for states 𝜔 = 𝐺 and 𝜔 = 𝑆 given maturity choice 𝜏∗ according
to Proposition 2. We define an equilibrium mapping ̂𝛶 ∶ [0, 1] → R as
follows:
̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) ≡ 𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) − 𝛩(𝜏∗)
(
)

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

(D.3)

]

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻
𝑆 (𝜏∗)).

1 −

+

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

Then, it is clear that the solution 𝜏∗ for ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 is the solution for the
first-order condition in Eq. (22) under the assumption that 𝜏𝑚 = 𝜏∗ for
all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}, and vice versa. Therefore, it is sufficient to prove that
a unique interior solution exists for the equation ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 to finish the
proof of this first step.

The first-order derivative of ̂𝛶 (⋅) with respect to 𝜏∗ is given by

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

]
𝑆 (𝜏∗))

𝜕 ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝜏∗ = 𝑓 ′′(𝜏∗) − 𝛩′(𝜏∗)
− 𝛩(𝜏∗)𝜌𝐻 𝛿𝛹 (𝑤∗
[

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 (𝜏∗))

− 𝛩(𝜏∗)

𝜎𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗))

− 𝜌𝐻

(
1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

(

1 −

+

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

𝜕𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜕𝑤∗

]

|
|
|
|𝜏𝑛=𝜏∗
𝑆 (𝜏𝑛)
|
|
𝜕𝜏𝑛
|
|𝜏𝑛=𝜏∗
𝑆 (𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝑤∗
|
|
|
𝜕𝜏𝑛
|𝜏𝑛=𝜏∗

.

The first term is negative because 𝑓 is concave. The second term
is negative due to Eqs. (B.17) and (D.2). The third term is negative
because 𝛹 (⋅) is negative (Eq. (B.13)) and 𝛩(⋅) is negative (D.1). The
fourth term is negative due to Eqs. (B.20) and (D.1). The fifth term is
negative because 1 − 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) is positive, 𝛹 ′(⋅) is negative (Eq. (B.13)),

(𝑁 − 1) (1 − 𝛾) ≥ 1.

(C.7)

𝛩′(𝜏∗) = −

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388421J. Dow et al.

and 𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
RHS is negative, ̂𝛶 (⋅) is decreasing in 𝜏∗. Furthermore, we have

𝑆 ∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is positive (Lemma B.5).49 Because all five terms in the

We prove that the first term in Eq. (D.7) is negative. Omitting explicit
dependence on 𝜏∗ to ease notation, we have

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
̂𝛶 (0) = 𝑓 ′(0) − 𝛩(0)
)
(
𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

1 −

+

𝐺(0)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 (0)) > 0,

]
𝑆 (0))

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

because 𝑓 ′(0) = ∞ and the second and the third terms are finite
similarly as in the proof of Proposition 3. Likewise, we have

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
̂𝛶 (1) = 𝑓 ′(1) − 𝛩(1)
)
(
𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

1 −

+

𝐺(1)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 (1)) < 0,

]

𝑆 (1))

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

because 𝑓 ′(1) = 0 and the second and the third terms are negative. The
second term is negative due to Eqs. (B.17) and (D.1). The third term is
negative because 𝛹 (⋅) is negative.

Therefore the intermediate value theorem implies a unique equilib-

rium choice of project maturity for listed firms.

Step (ii). In this step, we provide five technical lemmas.

Lemma D.9.
𝑁 > 1
.
̄𝑧

In an equilibrium, the number of listed firms 𝑁 must satisfy

Proof. By contradiction, assume 𝑁 ≤ 1
̄𝑧
is fully revealing regardless of project maturity choices because

. Then, each listed firm’s price

𝜆𝑛 =

1
̄𝑧

−

∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}

𝜆𝑚 ≥ 1
̄𝑧

− (𝑁 − 1) ≥ 1,

(D.4)

where the equality in Eq. (D.4) is simply a restatement of the informa-
tional resource constraint in Eq. (12), the first inequality in Eq. (D.4)
follows from the fact that each 𝜆𝑚 is a probability, and the second
inequality follows from 𝑁 ≤ 1∕ ̄𝑧. Thus, we have 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 = 0 and 𝜆𝑛 = 1,
)
in which case Proposition 3 implies that 𝜏∗𝑛 = 1 and 𝑤∗
𝐺 = 𝑢−1
.
Therefore, each listed firm’s shareholder value with fully revealing
prices, denoted 𝑆𝐹 𝑅, equals
𝑆𝐹 𝑅 = 𝑓 (1) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 − 𝜎𝐻 𝑢−1 ( 𝐾
𝛥𝜎

( 𝐾
𝛥𝜎

(D.5)

)

.

Eq. (D.5) and the definition of 𝑆𝑈 in Eq. (24) imply

𝑆𝐹 𝑅 > 𝑆𝑈 ⟺ 𝐾 < 𝛥𝜎𝑢

)

( 𝛥𝜌𝛥𝑉
𝜎𝐻

≡ ̄𝐾.

Therefore, if 𝑁 ≤ 1
̄𝑧
𝑀 > 1
̄𝑧
must find it optimal to remain unlisted, a contradiction. ■

no firm would optimally remain unlisted. But since
implies 𝑁 < 𝑀, that is, some firms

by assumption, then 𝑁 ≤ 1
̄𝑧

Lemma D.10. 𝜏∗ and 𝑆∗ are continuous, strictly decreasing functions of
𝐾. Furthermore, 𝜏∗

|𝐾=0 = 𝑓 (1) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 .

|𝐾=0 = 1 and 𝑆∗

Proof. We first show that 𝜏∗ is decreasing in 𝐾. In Step (i) we
established that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in 𝜏∗. Next, we prove that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
is decreasing in 𝐾. We have
𝜕 [𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗

]
𝑆 (𝜏∗))

𝜕 ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝐾

= −𝛩(𝜏∗)

(

1 −

+

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

𝜕𝐾
𝜕𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝐾

.

(D.7)

𝜕 [𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

]
𝐺) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 )

𝜕𝐾
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝐾

− (1 − 𝛿𝜏 𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝜎𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

= 𝜎𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

[

=

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝐾

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝐾
( 𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻

= 𝜎𝐻

= 𝜎𝐻

𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
(𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
)2
𝐺 )
𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
)2
(𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝐾

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝐾

[

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

[
𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

(

𝜌2
𝐻
𝜎2
𝐻
( 𝛥𝜌
𝛥𝜎

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌
)

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

]

) 𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
)
𝑢′′ (𝑤∗𝑛

𝑆
( 𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

)

]
𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

< 0,

)2]

(D.8)

where the second equality is due to Eq. (B.8), the third equality is
due to Eq. (B.12), and the fourth equality is due to Eq. (B.6). Because
𝑢′′ < 0,
𝑆 ) > 0
(Eq. (B.21)), then Eq. (D.8) is negative. Since 𝛩(𝜏∗) < 0 (Eq. (D.1), the
first term in Eq. (D.7) is indeed negative.

> 0 (Lemma B.5), and 𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

( 𝛥𝜌
𝛥𝜎

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝐾

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

)

Finally, because 𝛹 ′ < 0 and
term in Eq. (D.7) is also negative.

𝜕𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝐾

> 0 (Lemma B.5), the second

Since for all 𝐾 there is a unique 𝜏∗ solving ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0, and ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
is continuous and decreasing in 𝜏∗ and 𝐾 (Lemma B.5), Lemma B.3
implies 𝜏∗ is continuous and decreasing in 𝐾. Furthermore, for 𝐾 = 0,
𝑆 = 0. Since 𝛹 (0) = 0, Eq. (D.3) implies, for 𝐾 = 0, ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 is
𝑤∗
|𝐾=0 = 1. Therefore, 𝑆∗
solved by 𝜏∗ = 1, that is, 𝜏∗
|𝐾=0 = 𝑓 (1) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 .

𝐺 = 𝑤∗

Next, we prove 𝑆∗ is decreasing in 𝐾. By Eq. (38) we have

𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝐾

(

=

𝑓 ′ (𝜏∗)

−

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗

) 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝐾

−

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝐾

.

(D.9)

By the Envelope Theorem (see the proof of Lemma B.6) we have

)

(

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗ = −
𝜕 𝑛
=
𝜕𝐾

1
𝑁𝑧
) .

1 −
𝜎𝐻
𝛥𝜎𝑢′ (𝑤∗
𝑆

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝜓 (𝑤∗

𝑆

) ,

(D.10)

(D.11)

Substituting 𝜕 𝑛
using ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 and the definition of ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) in Eq. (D.3), we obtain,

in Eqs. (D.10)–(D.11) into 𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝐾

𝜕𝜏∗ and 𝜕 𝑛

in Eq. (D.9),

𝜕𝐾

(D.6)

𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝐾

= 𝛩(𝜏∗)

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

] 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝐾

−

𝜎𝐻
𝛥𝜎𝑢′ (𝑤∗
𝑆

) .

(D.12)

Eqs. (B.17) and (D.1) imply the first term in Eq. (D.12) is negative.
Since 𝑢′ > 0, then also the second term in Eq. (D.12) is negative.
Therefore, 𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝐾

< 0.

■

Lemma D.11. 𝜏∗ and 𝑆∗ are continuous, strictly decreasing functions of
|𝑁=1∕ ̄𝑧 = 𝑆𝐹 𝑅, where 𝑆𝐹 𝑅 is defined
𝑁. Furthermore, 𝜏∗
in Eq. (D.5).

|𝑁=1∕ ̄𝑧 = 1 and 𝑆∗

Proof. We first show that 𝜏∗ is decreasing in 𝑁. In Step (i) we
established that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in 𝜏∗. Next, we prove that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
is decreasing in 𝑁. Using Eq. (D.3) we obtain

𝜕 ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑁

= −

𝜕𝛩(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑁

− 𝛩(𝜏∗)

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝜕 [𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻
𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗

]
𝑆 (𝜏∗))
]
𝑆 (𝜏∗))

49 We note that 𝜆𝑛 for 𝑛 ∈  is fixed with symmetric maturity choices, so
𝑆 is only the direct effect identified in the proof of

𝐺 , 𝑤∗𝑛

the effect of 𝜏 ∗ on 𝑤∗𝑛
Lemma B.5.

(

1 −

+

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑁

+

1
𝑁 2 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗)).

(D.13)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388422J. Dow et al.

)(

(
1− 1
𝑁

𝛾

̄𝑧− 1
𝑁

)

From Eq. (D.1) we can write 𝛩(𝜏∗) = −
, which, since ̄𝑧 >
1
, is decreasing in 𝑁. Since 𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 (𝜏∗)) < 0
𝑁
(Eq. (B.17)), the first term in Eq. (D.13) is negative. The same steps as
in Eq. (D.8) yield
𝜕 [𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗

]
𝐺) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 )

̄𝑧(1−𝛾𝜏∗)

= 𝜎𝐻

𝜕𝑁
𝑢′′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )
)2
(𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

[

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
𝜕𝑁

𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 ) − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛)

( 𝛥𝜌
𝛥𝜎

)

]
𝑢(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

.

(D.14)

𝜕𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑁

𝜕𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑁

Since 𝑢′′ < 0 and
> 0 (Lemma B.5) and the term in square
brackets in Eq. (D.14) is positive (Eq. (B.21)), Eq. (D.14) is negative.
Therefore, since 𝛩(𝜏∗) < 0 (Eq. (D.1)), the second term in Eq. (D.13)
> 0 and 𝛹 ′ < 0 and 𝛹 < 0, the third term is
is negative. Since
also negative. Since for all 𝑁 there is a unique 𝜏∗ solving ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0,
and ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is continuous and decreasing in 𝜏∗ and 𝑁 (due to Lemma B.5
and by the fact that 𝜆𝑛 = 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧)), Lemma B.3 implies 𝜏∗ is continuous
and decreasing in 𝑁. Furthermore, the proof of Lemma D.9 shows that
for 𝑁 ≥ 1
, we have 𝜏∗ = 1 and 𝑆∗ = 𝑆𝐹 𝑅, where 𝑆𝐹 𝑅 is defined in
̄𝑧
Eq. (D.5).

.

(

−

−

=

𝑓 ′ (𝜏∗)

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗

) 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝑁

Next, we prove 𝑆∗ is decreasing in 𝑁. By Eq. (38) we have
𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝑁
By the Envelope Theorem (see the proof of Lemma B.6), we have
𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁
Substituting 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗
̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 and the definition of ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) in Eq. (D.3), we obtain,

in Eq. (D.10) and 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁

in Eq. (D.16) into 𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝐾

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

1
̄𝑧𝑁 2

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

= −

] .

(D.15)

(D.16)

, using

𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝑁

=

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

]
𝑆 (𝜏∗))

(

𝛩(𝜏∗)

𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝑁

+

1
̄𝑧𝑁 2

)

.

(D.17)

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

Since
and 𝛩(𝜏∗) < 0 (Eq. (D.1)), we conclude that 𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝑁

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

] < 0 (Eq. (B.17)), 𝜕𝜏∗
< 0. ■

𝜕𝑁

< 0,

Lemma D.12. 𝜏∗ and 𝑆∗ are continuous, strictly decreasing functions of
𝛾.

Proof. We first show that 𝜏∗ is decreasing in 𝛾. In Step (i) we
established that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in 𝜏∗. Next, we prove that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
is decreasing in 𝛾. Since price informativeness is independent of 𝛾,
Eqs. (28)–(29) imply that the wage is unchanged by an increase in 𝛾
fixing 𝜏∗, i.e.,
𝜕𝑤∗
𝐺(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝛾

𝑆 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝛾

(D.18)

𝜕𝑤∗

= 0.

=

= −

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝜕𝛩(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝛾

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

Using Eqs. (D.3) and (D.18), we can obtain
𝜕 ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝛾
Eq. (B.17) implies that the term 𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(𝜏∗)) is negative. Furthermore, Eq. (27) implies
𝜕𝛩(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝛾

(𝑁 − 1)(𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1)
𝑁 2 ̄𝑧(1 − 𝛾𝜏∗)2

< 0.

= −

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

] .

(D.19)

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆

(D.20)

From Eqs. (D.19) and (D.20), we conclude that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in
𝛾 at any given level of 𝜏∗. Thus, by Lemma B.5, 𝜏∗ is continuous and
decreasing in 𝛾.

Next, we prove 𝑆∗ is decreasing in 𝑁. By Eq. (38) we have

𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝛾

(

=

𝑓 ′ (𝜏∗)

−

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗

) 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝛾

.

By the Envelope Theorem (see the proof of Lemma B.6), we have
𝜕 𝑛
) .
𝜕𝜏∗ = −

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝜓 (𝑤∗

1
𝑁𝑧

1 −

)

(

𝑆

, using ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 and the definition of ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗)

into 𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝛾

Substituting 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗
in Eq. (D.3), we obtain,
𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝛾

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

= 𝛩(𝜏∗)

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

Since
and 𝛩(𝜏∗) < 0 (Eq. (D.1)), we conclude that 𝜕𝑆∗
𝜕𝛾

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

.

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

] 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝛾
] < 0 (Eq. (B.17)), 𝜕𝜏∗
< 0. ■

𝜕𝛾

(D.21)

< 0,

In the following lemma, we denote 𝑁 = 1
̄𝑧
|𝛾=0 and 𝑆∗

1 = 𝑆∗

|𝛾=1.

𝑆∗

and we denote 𝑆∗

0 =

Lemma D.13. Let 𝑁 = 𝑀. There exist strictly positive values 𝐾1, 𝐾2 such
that 𝐾1 < 𝐾2 < ̄𝐾 with the property that 𝑆∗
=
𝑆𝐹 𝑅

|𝛾=1,𝐾=𝐾1

|𝛾=0,𝐾=𝐾2

= 𝑆∗

|𝐾= ̄𝐾 = 𝑆𝑈 and:

(i) if 𝐾 ∈ [0, 𝐾1], then 𝑆∗ ≥ 𝑆𝑈 for all 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1], with a strict inequality

unless both 𝐾 = 𝐾1 and 𝛾 = 1;

(ii) if 𝐾 ∈ (𝐾1, 𝐾2), then there exists a unique ̂𝛾 ∈ (0, 1) such that

𝑆∗ ⋛ 𝑆𝑈 ⇔ 𝛾 ⋚ ̂𝛾;50

(iii) if 𝐾 ≥ 𝐾2, then 𝑆∗ ≤ 𝑆𝑈 for all 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1], with a strict inequality

unless both 𝐾 = 𝐾2 and 𝛾 = 0,

where 𝑆𝐹 𝑅 and ̄𝐾 are defined in Eqs. (D.5) and (D.6).

Proof. By Lemma D.10, 𝑆∗ is decreasing in 𝐾 for all 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1], and
𝑆∗

|𝐾=0 = 𝑓 (1) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 > 𝑆𝑈 . Furthermore,
|𝑁=𝑀,𝐾= ̄𝐾 < 𝑆∗

|𝑁=1∕ ̄𝑧,𝐾= ̄𝐾 = 𝑆𝐹 𝑅

|𝐾= ̄𝐾 = 𝑆𝑈 ,

𝑆∗

(D.22)

|𝐾=0 > 𝑆𝑈 > 𝑆∗

where the first inequality follows because 𝑆∗ is decreasing in 𝑁
(Lemma D.11), and the two equalities follow from the definitions of
𝑆𝐹 𝑅 and ̄𝐾 in Eqs. (D.5)–(D.6) in the proof of Lemma D.9. Thus,
|𝑁∈(1∕ ̄𝑧,𝑀],𝐾= ̄𝐾 . Since 𝑆∗ is a continuous function
𝑆∗
of 𝐾 by Lemma D.10, the intermediate value theorem implies that for
each 𝑁 ∈ ( 1
, 𝑀] and 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1] there exists a unique 𝐾 ∗ such that
̄𝑧
𝑆∗
|𝑁=𝑀,𝛾=1 and 𝐾2 = 𝐾 ∗
|𝑁=𝑀,𝛾=0. Since
𝑆∗ is decreasing in 𝑁 and 𝛾 (Lemmas D.11 and D.12), it is immediate
that 0 < 𝐾1 < 𝐾2 < ̄𝐾.

|𝐾=𝐾∗ = 𝑆𝑈 . Define 𝐾1 = 𝐾 ∗

Parts (i) and (iii) in the lemma follow immediately from the fact
that 𝑆∗ is continuous and decreasing in 𝐾 and 𝛾 (Lemmas D.10 and
D.12) together with the definitions of 𝐾1 and 𝐾2. Part (ii) in the lemma
follows from the intermediate value theorem and the facts that (i)
|𝛾=0 > 𝑆𝑈 > 𝑆∗
|𝛾=1 for 𝐾 ∈ (𝐾1, 𝐾2), and (ii) that 𝑆∗ is decreasing
𝑆∗
in 𝛾 (Eq. D.12). ■

Step (iii). In this step, we combine the technical results from Step (ii)
and derive the critical value 𝛾 ∗.

Lemma D.13-(i) and Lemma D.11 imply that for all 𝐾 ≤ 𝐾1 firms
are strictly better off by listing compared to not listing for all 𝑁 unless
both 𝐾 = 𝐾1 and 𝛾 = 1, in which case firms are indifferent if 𝑁 = 𝑀
and strictly better off listing for 𝑁 < 𝑀. Thus, Theorem 1 holds with
𝛾 ∗ = 0.

Lemma D.13-(ii) and Lemma D.11 imply that for all 𝐾 ∈ (𝐾1, 𝐾2)
firms are strictly better off by listing compared to not listing for all
𝛾 < ̂𝛾 and 𝑁, and, therefore all firms list in equilibrium for 𝛾 < ̂𝛾.
For 𝛾 = ̂𝛾 we have that firms are indifferent between listing and not
listing for 𝑁 = 𝑀 and strictly prefer listing for 𝑁 < 𝑀. Thus, in
equilibrium, all firms list when 𝛾 = ̂𝛾. Finally, for 𝛾 > ̂𝛾, firms prefer
not listing over listing for 𝑁 = 𝑀, but prefer listing over not listing for
𝑁 sufficiently close to 1∕ ̄𝑧. By Lemma D.11 and the Intermediate Value
Theorem, there exists a unique value 𝑁 ∗ ∈ (1∕ ̄𝑧, 𝑀) such that 𝑁 ∗ firms
list in equilibrium and firms are indifferent ex-ante (i.e., 𝑆∗ = 𝑆𝑈 ).
Thus, Theorem 1 holds with 𝛾 ∗ = ̂𝛾.

50 The notation 𝑧 ⋛ 𝑦 ⇔ 𝑧 ⋚ ℎ means ‘‘𝑥 is greater than 𝑦, equal to 𝑦, or less

than 𝑦 if and only if 𝑧 is less than ℎ, equal to ℎ, or greater than ℎ ’’.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388423J. Dow et al.

For the case 𝐾 ≥ 𝐾2, Lemma D.13-(iii) and Lemma D.11 imply
that all firms are strictly better off by not listing compared to listing
for 𝑁 = 𝑀 unless both 𝐾 = 𝐾2 and 𝛾 = 0, in which case firms are
indifferent if 𝑁 = 𝑀 and strictly better off listing for 𝑁 < 𝑀. Thus,
in this case all firms list in equilibrium. For all other cases (that is,
either 𝐾 > 𝐾2 and 𝛾 ≥ 0 or 𝐾 ≥ 𝐾2 and 𝛾 > 0), firms prefer not
listing over listing for 𝑁 = 𝑀, but prefer listing over not listing for 𝑁
sufficiently close to 1∕ ̄𝑧. By Lemma D.11 and the intermediate value
theorem, there exists a unique value 𝑁 ∗ ∈ (1∕ ̄𝑧, 𝑀) such that 𝑁 ∗ firms
list in equilibrium and firms are indifferent ex-ante (i.e., 𝑆∗ = 𝑆𝑈 ).
Thus, Theorem 1 holds with 𝛾 ∗ = 0. This completes the proof of the
■
theorem.

Appendix E

Proof of Theorem 2. We prove the theorem in several steps.

Lemma E.14. The project maturity is longer in the coordinated benchmark
than in the effort without price benchmark, i.e., 𝜏𝐶𝐵 > 𝜏𝐸𝑃 .

Proof. We prove by contradiction. Suppose that 𝜏𝐶𝐵 ≤ 𝜏𝐸𝑃 . Because
𝑓 ′(⋅) > 0, 𝑓 ′′(⋅) < 0, the first-order conditions in Eqs. (31) and (35)
imply that

(

−

1 −

)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝑆 ) ≥ −𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤𝐸𝑃

𝑆 ) > 0,

which implies

Using Lemmas E.14 and E.15, we conclude that 𝜏𝐶𝐵 > max(𝜏∗, 𝜏𝐸𝑃 ).
The inequality in Eq. (39) is immediate from the comparison between
the FOCs between equilibrium and the effort without price benchmark.
Because 𝑓 ′(⋅) > 0, 𝑓 ′′(⋅) < 0, 𝜏∗ is smaller than 𝜏𝐸𝑃 whenever the RHS
■
of Eq. (26) is greater than that of Eq. (31), and vice versa.

Proof of Theorem 3. First, we prove that 𝑆∗ < 𝑆𝐶𝐵. The planner’s
problem in Eq. (34) is strictly concave in 𝜏𝑠. This follows from the fact
that (i) the production function 𝑓 is strictly concave, and (ii) the proof
of Lemma B.7 implies that under the optimal contract with fixed 𝜆𝑛,
 𝑛 is convex in 𝜏𝑛. Since 𝜏∗ < 𝜏𝐶𝐵, it follows that 𝑆∗ < 𝑆𝐶𝐵. Second,
we prove that 𝑆∗ > 𝑆𝐸𝑃 . By concavity of each firm’s problem in project
maturity, we have

𝑆∗ ≥ 𝑆𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 ; 𝜏∗) ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) −  𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 , 𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 ; 𝜏∗)),

where  𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 , 𝑦) denotes firm 𝑛’s wage bill under the optimal contract
when 𝜏𝑛 = 𝜏𝐸𝑃 and 𝜆𝑛 = 𝑦 and 𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 ; 𝜏∗) denotes firm 𝑛’s price
efficiency when 𝜏𝑛 = 𝜏𝐸𝑃 and all other listed firms’ project maturity
equals 𝜏∗. By the Envelope Theorem (see the proof of Lemma B.6) we
have
𝜕 𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 , 𝜆𝑛)
𝜕𝜆𝑛

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

= 𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺) − 𝜌𝐻

𝑆 ) < 0.

Therefore,

𝑆∗ ≥ 𝑆𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 ; 𝜏∗) > 𝑓 (𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) −  𝑛(𝜏𝐸𝑃 , 0) = 𝑆𝐸𝑃 .

This completes the proof.

𝛹 (𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝑆 ) ≤ 𝛹 (𝑤𝐸𝑃

𝑆 ) < 0.

(E.1)

Appendix F

𝐺 > 𝑤𝐶𝐵
≥ 𝑤𝐸𝑃
𝑆 .

𝑆 . Then,
𝑆 > 0 (Proposition 2), it should be the case that

Because 𝛹 (⋅) < 0, 𝛹 ′(⋅) < 0, Eq. (E.1) implies 𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝑆
because 𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝐺 > 𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝑤𝐶𝐵
However, the IC constraints in Eqs. (32) and (36) together with
𝐺 > 𝑤𝐶𝐵
1 − 𝛿𝜏𝐸𝑃 ) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝐸𝑃
(

≥ 𝑤𝐸𝑃

≥ 𝑤𝐸𝑃

𝑤𝐶𝐵

)

𝑆

𝑆

𝑆 would imply that
1
𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝐺
𝑁 ̄𝑧
) (
(

=

)

𝑆

)

(E.2)

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

1 −
1 − 𝛿𝜏𝐶𝐵) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝐶𝐵

1 − 𝛿𝜏𝐶𝐵) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝐶𝐵
) ,

𝑆

+
> (

𝑆

where the in where the inequality is true because 𝑢(𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝐺 ) > 𝑢(𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝑆 )
and 𝛥𝜎 > 𝛥𝜌 (Lemma B.4). Then, Eq. (E.2) implies 𝜏𝐶𝐵 > 𝜏𝐸𝑃 . This
contradicts. ■

Lemma E.15. Equilibrium project maturity is shorter than in the coordi-
nated benchmark, i.e., 𝜏∗ < 𝜏𝐶𝐵.

Proof. We prove this by contradiction. Assume that all firms list in
equilibrium, 𝑁 = 𝑀, and suppose that 𝜏∗ ≥ 𝜏𝐶𝐵. Note that Eqs. (28)–
(29) are identical to Eqs. (36)–(37) except that 𝜏∗ is different from 𝜏𝐶𝐵
(because 𝜆𝑛 = 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) for all 𝑛 ∈  in both cases). Because 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 and
≥ 𝑤𝐶𝐵
𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 are increasing in 𝜏∗𝑛 fixing 𝜆𝑛 (Lemma B.5), we have 𝑤∗
𝐺
and 𝑤∗
𝑆

≥ 𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝐺

𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝑆 ) ≤ 𝛹 (𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝑆 . Then, because 𝛹 (⋅) < 0, 𝛹 ′(⋅) < 0, we have
1
𝑁 ̄𝑧
)

𝑆 ) < 0 ⇔

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 )

1 −

)

(

(

≤

1 −

1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝑆 ) < 0.

Using Eqs. (B.17) and (E.4), we have
{ 𝛩(𝜏∗)

[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(
1 − 1
−
𝑁 ̄𝑧
1
𝑁 ̄𝑧

1 −

> −

(

)

]
𝐺) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 )
𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗
𝑆 )
)

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤𝐶𝐵

𝑆 ) > 0.

}

Because 𝑓 ′(⋅) > 0, 𝑓 ′′(⋅) < 0, however, the first-order conditions in
Eqs. (26) and (35) together with Eq. (E.4) imply that 𝜏∗ < 𝜏𝐶𝐵, which
is a contradiction. ■

(E.3)

(E.4)

Proof of Proposition 5. Consider the case where all firms list so that
𝑁 = 𝑀. Let 𝜁 be a positive constant such that 𝑀 ̄𝑧 = 𝜁 for any level of
𝑀 (that is, an increase in 𝑀 is compensated by a decrease in ̄𝑧 to keep
the product of the two at the constant level 𝜁). Then, the equilibrium
informativeness is unchanged at the level given by Eq. (25). Therefore,
Eqs. (28)–(29) imply that the wage is unchanged by an increase in 𝑀
fixing 𝜏∗, i.e.,
𝜕𝑤∗
𝐺(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑀

𝑆 (𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑀

(F.1)

𝜕𝑤∗

= 0.

=

|
|
|
|𝑀 ̄𝑧=𝜁

|
|
|
|𝑀 ̄𝑧=𝜁

Thus, Proposition 5 follows from the proof of Lemma D.11 setting

𝑁 = 𝑀 and

= 0. We also note that in the coordinated

𝜕𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)
𝜕𝑁

|
|
|
|𝑁 ̄𝑧=𝜁

benchmark, 𝜏𝐶𝐵 and 𝑆𝐶𝐵 are determined in Eqs. (35)–(38) and are
unaffected by the parameter 𝑁 when 𝑁 ̄𝑧 is constant.

For the case where 𝑀 varies with ̄𝑧 fixed, we have two cases. Either
in equilibrium 𝑁 = 𝑀, in which case Lemma D.11 implies that 𝑆∗ and
𝜏∗ are a decreasing function of 𝑀. If, instead, 𝑁 < 𝑀, then 𝑁 remains
constant as 𝑀 varies, so that the number of unlisted firms 𝑀 − 𝑁
increases with 𝑀, but listed firms’ project choice and shareholder value
do not change. Thus, overall, 𝑆∗ and 𝜏∗ are a weakly decreasing in 𝑀.

■

Proof of Proposition 6. Consider first the case where all firms list so
that 𝑁 = 𝑀. In this case, Lemma D.12 implies that 𝜏∗ and 𝑆∗ decreas-
ing functions of 𝛾. We also note that in the coordinated benchmark,
𝜏𝐶𝐵 and 𝑆𝐶𝐵 are determined in Eqs. (35)–(38) and are unaffected by
the parameter 𝛾.

Next, consider the case where some firms remain unlisted, 𝑁 < 𝑀.
In this case, 𝜏∗ and 𝑁 are determined by the following system of
equations:

̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0;

𝑆∗ = 𝑆𝑈 ,

(F.2)

(F.3)

where ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is defined in Eq. (D.3), 𝑆∗ is defined in Eq. (30), and 𝑆𝑈
is defined in Eq. (24) and is a fixed value independent of 𝜏∗, 𝑁, and 𝛾.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388424J. Dow et al.

Since 𝑆𝑈 is independent of 𝜏∗, 𝑁, and 𝛾, Eq. (F.3) implies that 𝑆∗

is unaffected by an increase in 𝛾.

Next, we prove that 𝜏∗ decreases in 𝛾. Step-(i) in the proof of
̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in 𝜏∗, the proof of
Theorem 1 establishes that
Lemma D.11 establishes that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in 𝑁, and the proof
of Lemma D.12 establishes that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing 𝛾. Therefore, by
Lemma B.5, Eq. (F.2) defines 𝑁 as a decreasing function of both 𝜏∗
and 𝛾. Thus, using Eq. (30) we can write Eq. (F.3) as

𝑓 (𝜏∗) −  − 𝑆𝑈 = 0,

(F.4)

where  is the wage bill under the optimal contract. We note that
, depends on 𝜏∗ directly but also indirectly through 𝑁, whereas 
depends on 𝛾 only indirectly through 𝑁 (see Lemma B.6). Implicit
differentiation of Eq. (F.4) gives

𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝛾

=

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁
𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) − 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏

𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝛾
∗
− 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁

∗ .

𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝜏

(F.5)

Since 𝜕 𝑛
> 0 (Eq. (D.16) and 𝑁 is decreasing in 𝛾, the numerator of
𝜕𝑁
Eq (F.5) is negative. For the denominator, using the expression for 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗
in Eq. (D.10) and ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 and the definition of ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) in Eq. (D.3), we
obtain

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) −

∗

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏

= 𝛩(𝜏∗)

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

𝑆 (𝜏∗))

] > 0

(F.6)

where the inequality follows by Eqs. (B.17) and (D.1). Furthermore,
since 𝜕 𝑛
> 0 (Eq. (D.16) and 𝑁 is decreasing in 𝜏∗, we conclude that
𝜕𝑁
the denominator of Eq (F.10) is positive. Therefore, we concludes that
𝜕𝜏∗
■
𝜕𝛾

< 0.

Proof of Proposition 7. Consider first the case where all firms list
so that 𝑁 = 𝑀. In this case, Lemma D.10 implies that 𝜏∗ and 𝑆∗
decreasing functions of 𝐾. We also note that the first term in the
RHS of Eq. (D.7) depends on the sensitivity of price informative-
ness 𝛩(𝜏∗) and represents the amplification effect due to the strategic
complementarity in project maturity. This term equals zero in the
coordinated benchmark, where price informativeness is independent of
project maturity.

Next, consider the case where some firms remain unlisted, 𝑁 < 𝑀.
In this case, 𝜏∗ and 𝑁 are determined by the system of equations in
Eqs. (F.2)–(F.3), where ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is defined in Eq. (D.3), 𝑆∗ is defined in
Eq. (30), and 𝑆𝑈 is defined in Eq. (24) and is a fixed value independent
of 𝜏∗, 𝑁, and 𝐾.

Since 𝑆𝑈 is independent of 𝜏∗, 𝑁, and 𝐾, Eq. (F.3) implies that 𝑆∗

is unaffected by an increase in 𝐾.

Next, we prove that 𝑁 decreases in 𝐾. Step-(i) in the proof of
̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in 𝜏∗, the proof of
Theorem 1 establishes that
Lemma D.11 establishes that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing in 𝑁, and the proof
of Lemma D.10 establishes that ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) is decreasing 𝐾. Therefore, by
Lemma B.5, Eq. (F.2) defines 𝜏∗ as a decreasing function of both 𝑁
and 𝐾. Using Eq. (30) we can write Eq. (F.3) as

𝑓 (𝜏∗) −  𝑛 − 𝑆𝑈 = 0.

(F.7)

Implicit differentiation of Eq. (F.7) gives

𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝐾

= −

(

(

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) − 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗
𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) − 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗

) 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝐾
) 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝑁

− 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝐾
− 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁

.

Using 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗

̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) in Eq. (D.3), we obtain,
(

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) −

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏∗

) 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝐾

×

𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝐾

.

in Eqs. (D.10) and using ̂𝛶 (𝜏∗) = 0 and the definition of

= 𝛩(𝜏∗)

[𝜎𝐺𝛹 (𝑤∗

𝐺(𝜏∗)) − 𝜌𝐻

1 − 𝛿𝜏∗) 𝛹 (𝑤∗
(

]
𝑆 (𝜏∗))

Eqs. (B.17) and (D.1) and the fact that 𝜏∗ is decreasing in 𝐾 imply
that the previous expression, and, therefore, the first term in both the
numerator and denominator of Eq. (F.8), is negative. Since 𝜕 𝑛
and
𝜕𝐾
𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁
Eq. (F.8) is negative.

are both positive by Eqs. (D.11) and (D.16), conclude that 𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝐾

in

Finally, we argue that the effect of 𝐾 on 𝜏∗ is ambiguous. The
argument used in this proof to show that 𝜏∗ is decreasing function of
both 𝑁 and 𝐾 also implies that 𝑁 is a decreasing function of both 𝜏∗
and 𝐾. Using Eq. (30) we can write Eq. (F.3) as

𝑓 (𝜏∗) −  𝑛 − 𝑆𝑈 = 0.

Implicit differentiation of Eq. (F.9) gives
+ 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝐾
∗
− 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝐾
𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) − 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏

𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝐾

𝜕𝑁
𝜕𝜏

∗ .

=

(F.9)

(F.10)

The proof of Proposition 6 shows that the denominator of Eq. (F.10)
is positive. Since 𝜕 𝑛
> 0 (Eq. (D.16) and 𝑁 is
𝜕𝐾
decreasing in 𝐾, the sign of the numerator of Eq (F.10) is ambiguous.
Hence, the sign of 𝜕𝜏∗
𝜕𝐾

> 0 (Eq. (D.11) and 𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝑁

is ambiguous.

The proof for 𝛿 is similar and is omitted.

Appendix G

■

Proof of Proposition 8. As a preliminary step, we prove the follow-
ing results about the financial equilibrium induced by firms’ project
maturity choices with long- and short-term investors.

Lemma G.16.

(i) Let 𝜏𝑚 = 𝜏 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛} and 𝜏𝑛 < 𝜏. Then, for 𝜇 ≥ 1 − 1∕𝑁
we have 𝜆𝑛 = 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧), whereas for 𝜇 < 1 − 1∕𝑁 we have 𝜆𝑛 =
min{(1 − 𝜇)∕ ̄𝑧, 𝜆∗} > 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) where 𝜆∗ solves short-term investors’
indifference condition

(

1 − 𝜆𝑛

)

(1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚) (1 − 𝜏𝛾) for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}.

(ii) Let 𝜏𝑚 = 𝜏 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵{𝑛} and 𝜏𝑛 > 𝜏. Then, for 𝜇 ≥ 1∕𝑁 we have
𝜆𝑛 = 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧), whereas for 𝜇 < 1∕𝑁, we have 𝜆𝑛 = max{𝜇∕ ̄𝑧, 𝜆∗} <
1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) where 𝜆∗ solves short-term investors’ indifference condition
(
1 − 𝜆𝑛

(1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚) (1 − 𝜏𝛾) for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}.

)

■

Proof of Lemma G.16. -(i): Let 𝜏𝑚 = 𝜏 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛} and 𝜏𝑛 < 𝜏.
We show that for 𝜇 ≥ 1−1∕𝑁 long-term investors are marginal investors
for all firms in that 𝜆𝑛 = 𝜆𝑚 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}. In other words, a
firm that deviates from a symmetric maturity choice by lowering its
project maturity has no impact on its price informativeness. In this case,
all short-term investors choose firm 𝑛 because it has informativeness
identical to other firms but lower maturity. By contrast, long-term
investors are indifferent across all firms; 𝜀𝐿 unit mass of long-term
investors choose firm 𝑛, and 𝜇 − 𝜀𝐿 unit mass of them are equally
distributed over the remaining 𝑁 − 1 firms. The condition 𝜆𝑛 = 𝜆𝑚 for
all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛} requires

(F.8)

𝜆𝑛 =

1 − 𝜇 + 𝜀𝐿
̄𝑧

=

𝜇 − 𝜀𝐿
(𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧

= 𝜆𝑚,

(G.1)

which is equivalent to 𝜀𝐿 = 𝜇 − (𝑁 − 1)∕𝑁. Therefore, there exists
𝜀𝐿 ∈ [0, 𝜇] such that (G.1) holds if and only if 𝜇 ≥ 1 − 1∕𝑁.

Next, consider the case where short-term investors are marginal
investors for all firms. Since 𝜏𝑛 < 𝜏, it must be 𝜆𝑛 > 𝜆𝑚 for all
𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}, which implies that long-term investors do not invest in
firm 𝑛. Then, 1 − 𝜇 − 𝜀𝑆 unit mass of short-term investors invest in firm
𝑛, and 𝜀𝑆 unit mass of short-term investors are equally distributed over

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388425J. Dow et al.

the remaining 𝑁 − 1 firms. The condition 𝜆𝑛 > 𝜆𝑚 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}
requires

𝜆𝑛 =

1 − 𝜇 − 𝜀𝑆
̄𝑧

>

𝜇 + 𝜀𝑆
(𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧

= 𝜆𝑚,

(G.2)

which is equivalent to 𝜀𝑆 < 1 − 𝜇 − 1∕𝑁. Therefore, Eq. (G.2) holds for
some 𝜀𝑆 ∈ [0, 1 − 𝜇] if and only if 𝜇 < 1 − 1∕𝑁. Short-term investors are
marginal investors for all firms if the following indifference condition
holds:

(1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚) (1 − 𝜏𝛾) for all 𝑚 ≠ 𝑛,

or equivalently,
(

1 − 𝜇 − 𝜀𝑆
̄𝑧

1 −

)

(1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) =

(

1 −

)

𝜇 + 𝜀𝑆
(𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧

(1 − 𝜏𝛾) .

(G.3)

When 𝜏𝑛 = 𝜏, the above equation is solved for 𝜀𝑆 = 1 − 𝜇 − 1∕𝑁. As
𝜏𝑛 decreases, 𝜀𝑆 must decrease for the equality to hold. By inspecting
≥ 0 that solves Eq. (G.3)
Eq. (G.3) it is easy to verify that there exists 𝜀𝑆
for all 𝜏𝑛 ∈ [0, 𝜏) if (1 − 𝜇)∕ ̄𝑧 ≥ 1. If, instead, (1 − 𝜇)∕ ̄𝑧 < 1, then there
exists 𝑡 ∈ [0, 𝜏) such that Eq. (G.3) holds for all 𝜏𝑛 ∈ [𝑡, 𝜏), but for all
𝜏𝑛 ∈ [0, 𝑡) short-term investors are strictly better off investing in firm 𝑛
and 𝜆𝑛 = (1 − 𝜇)∕ ̄𝑧; long-term investors are strictly better off investing
■
in all other firms.

Proof of Lemma G.16. -(ii): Let 𝜏𝑚 = 𝜏 for all 𝑚 ≠ 𝑛 and 𝜏𝑛 > 𝜏. We
show that for 𝜇 ≥ 1∕𝑁 long-term investors are marginal investors for
all firms such that 𝜆𝑛 = 𝜆𝑚 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛}. In other words, a firm
that deviates from a symmetric maturity choice by increasing its project
maturity has no impact on its price informativeness. Since firm 𝑛 has
same price informativeness as other firms but longer maturity, short-
term investors do not invest in firm 𝑛. On the other hand, long-term
investors are indifferent across all firms; 𝜇 − 𝜀𝐿 unit mass of long-
term investors choose firm 𝑛, and 𝜀𝐿 unit mass of them are equally
distributed over the remaining 𝑁 − 1 firms. The condition 𝜆𝑛 = 𝜆𝑚
requires

𝜆𝑛 =

𝜇 − 𝜀𝐿
̄𝑧

=

1 − 𝜇 + 𝜀𝐿
(𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧

= 𝜆𝑚,

(G.4)

or equivalently, 𝜀𝐿 = 𝜇 − 1∕𝑁. Then, there exists 𝜀𝐿 ∈ [0, 𝜇] solving
Eq. (G.4) if and only if 𝜇 ≥ 1∕𝑁.

Next, consider the case where short-term investors are marginal
across all firms. Since 𝜏𝑛 > 𝜏, it must be 𝜆𝑛 < 𝜆𝑚 for all 𝑚 ∈  ⧵ {𝑛},
which implies that all long-term investors invest in firm 𝑛 because it
has lower price informativeness than other firms. On the other hand,
𝜀𝑆 unit mass of short-term investors invest in firm 𝑛, and 1 − 𝜇 − 𝜀𝑆 unit
mass of them are equally distributed over the remaining 𝑁 − 1 firms.
The condition 𝜆𝑛 < 𝜆𝑚 requires

𝜆𝑛 =

𝜇 + 𝜀𝑆
̄𝑧

<

1 − 𝜇 − 𝜀𝑆
(𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧

= 𝜆𝑚,

(G.5)

or 𝜀𝑆 < 1∕𝑁 − 𝜇. Then, there exists 𝜀𝑆 ∈ [0, 1 − 𝜇] such that Eq. (G.5)
holds if and only if 𝜇 < 1∕𝑁. Furthermore, 𝜆𝑛 must satisfy short-term
investors’ indifference condition

and it is immediate to verify that 𝜇𝐿 (𝜏) ∈ (0, 1∕𝑁). If, instead, 𝜇 ∈
(𝜇𝐿 (𝜏) , 1∕𝑁)
, then there exists 𝑡′ ∈ (𝜏, 1) such that Eq. (G.6) holds for
all 𝜏𝑛 ∈ (𝜏, 𝑡′], but for all 𝜏𝑛 ∈ (𝑡′, 1] long-term investors are strictly
better off investing in firm 𝑛 and 𝜆𝑛 = 𝜇∕ ̄𝑧; short-term investors are
■
strictly better off investing in all other firms.

Proof of Proposition 8. -(i): Assume all firms choose maturity 𝜏. For
𝜇 < 1∕𝑁, Lemma G.16 implies that when a firm deviates locally to some
𝜏𝑛 ≠ 𝜏, its price efficiency is determined by the same indifference con-
dition as in the original model without long-term investors. Therefore,
by the strict concavity of the firm’s problem established in Appendix B
(Lemma B.7), if a symmetric equilibrium exists, it must be equal to the
original model, 𝜏𝜇 = 𝜏∗.

short-term investors’

Consider a firm’s deviation to 𝜏𝑛 < 𝜏∗. Then, 𝜆𝑛 is at most the value
that
satisfied
indifference
(Lemma G.16-i). Therefore, the firm has no incentive to deviate because
its payoff of deviation is less than or equal to the payoff of deviation
in the original model.

condition

is

Consider a firm’s deviation to 𝜏𝑛 > 𝜏∗. Then, there are two cases.
Define 𝜇∗ = 𝜇𝐿 (𝜏∗) (see Eq. (G.7)). If 𝜇 ≤ 𝜇∗, the payoff of deviation is
identical to the payoff of deviation in the original model (Lemma G.16-
ii). Therefore, the firm has no incentive to deviate, which implies
choosing 𝜏∗ is the unique equilibrium. If 𝜇 ∈ (𝜇∗, 1∕𝑁), if a symmetric
equilibrium exists, it must be equal to 𝜏∗ (Lemma G.16-ii).
■

Proof of Proposition 8. -(ii): Assume all firms choose maturity 𝜏. For
𝜇 ≥ 1 − 1∕𝑁, Lemma G.16 implies that when a firm deviates to some
𝜏𝑛 ≠ 𝜏, its price efficiency is unchanged and equal to 1∕( ̄𝑧𝑁). Therefore,
this is the same as the case where informed trading is exogenous and
the equilibrium is 𝜏𝐶𝐵.
■

Proof of Proposition 8. -(iii): Suppose that there exists a symmetric
equilibrium, and all firms choose maturity 𝜏. For 𝜇 ∈ [1∕𝑁, 1 − 1∕𝑁),
Lemma G.16 implies that when a firm deviates to some 𝜏𝑛 > 𝜏, its price
efficiency is unchanged and equal to 1∕( ̄𝑧𝑁). Therefore, 𝜏𝜇 ≥ 𝜏𝐶𝐵 is
necessary for otherwise deviating to 𝜏𝑛 > 𝜏𝜇 is profitable. However,
when a firm deviates to some 𝜏𝑛 < 𝜏, its price efficiency is determined
by short-term investors’ indifference condition. Therefore, 𝜏𝜇 ≤ 𝜏∗
is necessary for otherwise deviating to 𝜏𝑛 < 𝜏𝜇 is profitable. Since
𝜏𝐶𝐵 > 𝜏∗, the two necessary conditions cannot be met simultaneously.
■

This concludes the proof of Proposition 8.

In a clientele equilibrium, 𝑁𝑆 firms choose
Proof of Proposition 9.
maturity 𝜏𝑆 and 𝑁 − 𝑁𝑆 firms choose maturity 𝜏𝐿, where 𝜏𝑆 < 𝜏𝐿.
Initially we take 𝑁𝑆 , 𝜏𝑆 , 𝜏𝐿 as given and derive conditions such that it
is optimal for short-term investors to invest in short-term firms and for
long-term investors to invest in long-term firms. Let 
𝑆 be the set of
short-term firms and 
𝐿 the set of long-term firms. With this allocation
of investors across firms, price efficiency for short-term firms, 𝜆𝑆 say,
equals

𝜆𝑆 =

1 − 𝜇
̄𝑧𝑁𝑆

.

(1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚) (1 − 𝜏𝛾) for all 𝑚 ≠ 𝑛,

Similarly, price efficiency for long-term firms equals

or equivalently,

(

1 −

)

𝜇 + 𝜀𝑆
̄𝑧

(1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) =

(

1 −

)

1 − 𝜇 − 𝜀𝑆
(𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧

(1 − 𝜏𝛾) for all 𝑚 ≠ 𝑛.

(G.6)

When 𝜏𝑛 = 𝜏, the above equation is solved for 𝜀𝑆 = 1∕𝑁 − 𝜇. As 𝜏𝑛
≥ 0
increases, 𝜀𝑆 must decrease for the equality to hold. There exists 𝜀𝑆
that solves Eq. (G.6) for all 𝜏𝑛 ∈ (𝜏, 1] if 𝜇 ≤ 𝜇𝐿 (𝜏), where 𝜇𝐿 (𝜏) solves

(

1 −

)

𝜇𝐿 (𝜏)
̄𝑧

(

(1 − 𝛾) =

1 −

)

1 − 𝜇𝐿 (𝜏)
(𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧

(1 − 𝜏𝛾) ,

(G.7)

𝜆𝐿 =

𝜇
̄𝑧 (𝑁 − 𝑁𝑆

) .

We denote 𝛼𝑆 the fraction of short-term firms, 𝛼𝑆 = 𝑁𝑆
the level of price efficiency in a symmetric equilibrium as ̄𝜆 = 1
̄𝑧𝑁
these definitions, we can write
𝜇 ̄𝜆
1 − 𝛼𝑆

(1 − 𝜇) ̄𝜆
𝛼𝑆

𝜆𝑆 =

𝜆𝐿 =

𝑁

;

.

, and we denote
. With

(G.8)

Since 𝜏𝑆 < 𝜏𝐿, short-term investors will invest in short-term firms only
if 𝜆𝐿 < 𝜆𝑆 < 1, and therefore, by Eq. (G.8), we must have
̄𝛼 ≡ 1 − 𝜇 > 𝛼𝑆 > (1 − 𝜇) ̄𝜆 ≡ 𝛼.

(G.9)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388426J. Dow et al.

Since 1 ≤ 𝑁𝑆

≤ 𝑁 − 1, Eq. (G.9) also implies

1 − (𝑁 − 1) ̄𝑧 < 𝜇 < 1 −

1
𝑁

.

(G.10)

Furthermore, for short-term investors to invest in short-term firms,
𝜆𝑆 , 𝜆𝐿, 𝜏𝑆 , 𝜏𝐿 must satisfy
(
1 − 𝜆𝑆

1 − 𝜏𝑆 𝛾) ≥ (

1 − 𝜏𝐿𝛾) .

1 − 𝜆𝐿

) (

) (

increasing in 𝛼, and, by the Envelope Theorem, each firm’s wage bill
is continuous and decreasing in price informativeness (see the proof of
Lemma B.6). Therefore, by the Envelope Theorem and the planner’s
problem in Eq. ((34)) (with 𝑁 replaced by 𝑁 (
is
increasing and continuous in 𝛼𝑆 .
(𝛼𝑆
)
) ≥ ̂𝜈𝑆

is decreasing in 𝛼𝑆 . By contradiction,
(𝛼𝑆

Next, we show that ̂𝜈𝑆
(𝛼′
𝑆 > 𝛼𝑆 and ̂𝜈𝑆
𝑆

)
, or, equivalently

assume 𝛼′

1 − 𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

)
),

̂𝜈𝐿

)

Since 𝜆𝑆 > 𝜆𝐿, it is optimal for long-term investors to invest in
long-term firms.

𝑓 (𝜏∗
𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

) −  (𝜏∗
)

𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

) , 𝜆𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

)) ≥ 𝑓 (𝜏∗

𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

) −  (𝜏∗
)

𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

) , 𝜆𝑆

)) .

(𝛼𝑆
(G.12)

Next, we define
(𝜏𝑛, 𝜏𝑆 , 𝛼𝑆

) ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) −  (𝜏𝑛, 𝜆𝑛) ,

𝜈𝑆

where 𝜆𝑛 solves short-term investors’ indifference condition

(1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚)

1 − 𝜏𝑆 𝛾) , for all 𝑚 ∈ 
(

𝑆 ∖{𝑛}.

(G.11)

Because 𝜆𝑚 in Eq. (G.11) is a function of 𝛼𝑆 , 𝜆𝑛 is a function of 𝜏𝑛, 𝜏𝑆 , 𝛼𝑆 .
Let 𝜏𝑠

)

(𝜏𝑆 ; 𝛼𝑆
)

be the best response
) .

(𝜏𝑛, 𝜏𝑆 , 𝛼𝑆

𝜈𝑆

∈ arg max

𝜏𝑛

(𝜏𝑆 ; 𝛼𝑆

𝜏𝑠

By Theorem 1 (with 𝑁 replaced by 𝑁𝛼𝑆 ) the fixed point 𝜏∗
𝜏𝑠

exists and is unique. Hence, we denote

(𝜏∗

)

𝑆 =

𝑆 ; 𝛼𝑆

̂𝜈𝑆 = 𝜈𝑆

(𝜏∗

𝑆 , 𝜏∗

𝑆 , 𝛼𝑆

) .

Also, define
(𝜏𝑛, 𝜏𝐿, 𝛼𝑆
𝜈𝐿
where 𝜆𝐿 = 𝜇 ̄𝜆
1−𝛼𝑆
)

(𝜏𝐿; 𝛼𝑆

) ≡ 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) −  (𝜏𝑛, 𝜆𝐿

)

(Eq. (G.8)). Let 𝜏𝑙
) .
(𝜏𝑛, 𝜏𝐿, 𝛼𝐿

(𝜏𝐿; 𝛼𝑆

)

be the best response

𝜏𝑛

∈ arg max

𝜏𝑙
𝜈𝐿
By Section 5.2.2 (with 𝑁 replaced by 𝑁 (
𝜏∗
𝐿 = 𝜏𝑙
≡ 𝜈𝐿

(𝜏∗
𝐿; 𝛼𝑆
(𝜏∗
𝐿, 𝜏∗

𝐿, 𝛼𝑆

) .

̂𝜈𝐿

)

exists and is unique. Hence, we denote

1 − 𝛼𝑆

)
), the fixed point

For clarity, in the rest of the proof, we make explicit the dependence
of 𝜏∗

𝑆 , ̂𝜈𝐿, ̂𝜈𝑆 on 𝛼𝑆 by writing 𝜏∗
𝐿

) , 𝜏∗
𝑆

) , ̂𝜈𝐿

) , ̂𝜈𝑆

𝐿, 𝜏∗

(𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

)
.

Lemma G.17.

(i) 𝜆𝑆

is continuous and decreasing in 𝛼𝑆 with 𝜆𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

)
(𝛼𝑆
)
𝜆𝑆 ( ̄𝛼) = ̄𝜆; 𝜆𝐿
( ̄𝜆𝜇)∕(1 − (1 − 𝜇) ̄𝜆) and 𝜆𝐿 ( ̄𝛼) = ̄𝜆.

is continuous and increasing in 𝛼𝑆 with 𝜆𝐿

(ii) 𝜏𝑆

)

(𝛼𝑆

is continuous and decreasing in 𝛼𝑆 with 𝜏𝑆

(𝛼)

(𝛼)

= 1 and
(𝛼)
=

= 1 and
(𝛼) <

is continuous and increasing in 𝛼𝑆 with 𝜏𝐿

(iii) ̂𝜈𝑆

is continuous and decreasing in 𝛼𝑆 with ̂𝜈𝑆

 (1, 1) and ̂𝜈𝑆 ( ̄𝛼) = 𝑓 (𝜏∗) −  (𝜏∗, ̄𝜆)
(𝛼)
= 𝑓 (𝜏𝐿
increasing in 𝛼𝑆 with ̂𝜈𝐿
̂𝜈𝐿 ( ̄𝛼) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝐶𝐵) −  (𝜏𝐶𝐵, ̄𝜆)
.

(𝛼)

̂𝜈𝐿
;
) − 

(𝛼)

= 𝑓 (1) −
)
is continuous and
(𝛼) ,
̄𝜆𝜇
1−(1−𝜇) ̄𝜆

and

)

(𝛼𝑆
(
𝜏𝐿

)

(𝛼𝑆

𝜏𝑆 ( ̄𝛼) = 𝜏∗; 𝜏𝐿
𝜏𝐿 ( ̄𝛼) = 𝜏𝐶𝐵.
)

(𝛼𝑆

Proof of Lemma G.17. -(i): This is immediate from Eq. (G.8).

■

𝑆 is decreasing in 𝛼𝑆 and that 𝜏∗

Proof of Lemma G.17. -(ii): Following the same steps as in Proposi-
tion 5, we can show that 𝜏∗
𝐿 is decreasing
in 𝛼𝑆 . By the implicit function theorem, 𝜏∗
𝐿 are continuous in 𝛼𝑆 .
(𝛼)
Furthermore, since 𝜆𝑆
= 1. This
is because firms have no incentive to deviate to a shorter maturity to
increase price informativeness, and the manager’s compensation only
depends on the price realization in 𝑡 = 1. Also, since 𝜆𝑆 ( ̄𝛼) = ̄𝜆, it is
immediate that 𝜏𝑆 ( ̄𝛼) = 𝜏∗ by Theorem 1. Similarly, the analysis in
Section 5.2.2 implies that for 𝜆𝐿 ( ̄𝛼) = ̄𝜆 we have 𝜏𝐿 ( ̄𝛼) = 𝜏𝐶𝐵.
■

= 1, it is immediate that 𝜏𝑆

𝑆 , 𝜏∗

(𝛼)

Proof of Lemma G.17. -(iii): We first show that ̂𝜈𝐿
is increas-
ing and continuous in 𝛼𝑆 . This is because 𝜆𝐿 (𝛼) is continuous and

)

(𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

) <
)
. Eq. (G.11) implies that when the fraction of short-term firms
)
(𝛼′
, its price informa-
𝑆
)
. Since  is decreasing in 𝜆, we

By Lemma G.17-(i) and -(ii), we have 𝜆𝑆
𝜏𝑆
is 𝛼𝑆 , if firm 𝑛 deviates to 𝜏𝑛 = 𝜏∗
𝑆
(𝛼𝑆
tiveness 𝜆𝑛 is such that 𝜆𝑛 > 𝜆𝑆
have

) < 𝜏𝑆

) < 𝜆𝑆

and 𝜏𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

)

𝑓 (𝜏∗
𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

) −  (𝜏∗
)

𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

) , 𝜆𝑛) > 𝑓 (𝜏∗

𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

) −  (𝜏∗
)

𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

) , 𝜆𝑆

(𝛼′
𝑆

)) .

By Eq- (G.12), this is a profitable deviation, which contradicts the
)
. Finally,  is continuous in 𝜏𝑆 , 𝜆𝑆 , and 𝜏𝑆 , 𝜆𝑆
optimality of 𝜏∗
𝑆
are continuous in 𝛼𝑆 . Therefore, ̂𝜈𝑆 is continuous in 𝛼𝑆 .

(𝛼𝑆

The values for ̂𝜈𝑆

(𝛼) , ̂𝜈𝐿

definitions of ̂𝜈𝑆 , ̂𝜈𝐿 together with Lemma G.17-(i) and -(ii).

(𝛼) , ̂𝜈𝑆 ( ̄𝛼) , ̂𝜈𝐿 ( ̄𝛼) follow directly from the
■

To conclude the proof of Proposition 9 we observe that,
(𝛼) > ̂𝜈𝐿
and ̂𝜈𝑆 ( ̄𝛼) < ̂𝜈𝐿 ( ̄𝛼). By
by Lemma G.17-(iii), we have ̂𝜈𝑆
continuity of ̂𝜈𝑆 , ̂𝜈𝐿, there exists an intermediate value 𝛼∗ ∈
such
that ̂𝜈𝑆 (𝛼∗) = ̂𝜈𝐿 (𝛼∗). Since, by Lemma G.17-(i), we have 𝜆𝑆 (𝛼∗) >
𝜆𝐿 (𝛼∗), then we can show that ̂𝜈𝑆 (𝛼∗) = ̂𝜈𝐿 (𝛼∗) requires 𝜏∗
𝑆 (𝛼∗) <
(𝛼𝑆
)
𝑆 (𝛼∗) ≥ 𝜏∗
𝐿 (𝛼∗). Suppose not, i.e., 𝜏∗
𝜏∗
𝐿 (𝛼∗). Then, ̂𝜈𝑆 (𝛼∗) = ̂𝜈𝐿
is
equivalent to

(𝛼, ̄𝛼)

(𝛼)

(𝛼∗)

(𝛼∗) , 𝜆𝑆

) =  (𝜏∗

𝑓 (𝜏∗
𝑆

(𝛼∗)

) − 𝑓 (𝜏∗
𝐿

(𝛼∗) , 𝜆𝐿
𝐿 (𝛼∗) and 𝑓 is increasing, it must be  (𝜏∗
𝑆 (𝛼∗) ,
)
. But this is impossible because  is
𝐿 (𝛼∗) , 𝜆𝐿 (𝛼∗)

Since 𝜏∗
𝜆𝑆 (𝛼∗)
decreasing in 𝜆 and increasing in 𝜏 (see the proof of Lemma B.6).

𝑆 (𝛼∗) ≥ 𝜏∗
) ≥  (𝜏∗

−  (𝜏∗

(𝛼∗))

(𝛼∗))

𝐿

𝑆

Furthermore, by Lemma G.17-(ii), we have 𝜏∗ < 𝜏∗

𝑆 (𝛼∗) < 𝜏∗

𝐿 (𝛼∗) <

𝜏𝐶𝐵.

Consider a candidate equilibrium number of short-term firms 𝑁𝑆
where 𝛼𝑆 = 𝑁𝑆 ∕𝑁 is such that 𝜏∗
𝐿 (𝛼∗). Short-term firms do
not have an incentive to deviate to a lower 𝜏 nor to a marginally larger
𝜏 because a deviating firm’s 𝜆 is determined by Eq. ((G.11)) and the
)
deviation cannot dominate 𝜏∗
by construction. Hence, short-term
𝑆
firms do not have an incentive to deviate if

𝑆 (𝛼∗) < 𝜏∗

(𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

̂𝜈𝑆

) ≥ max
𝜏𝑛≥𝜏∗

𝑆 (𝛼𝑆 )

(

𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) − 

𝜏𝑛,

𝜇 ̄𝜆
1 − 𝛼𝑆 + 𝜂)

̄𝑧 (

)

,

(G.13)

Where we define 𝜂 = 1∕𝑁. Notice that Eq. (G.13) can be equivalently
written as

(𝛼𝑆

) ≥ ̂𝜈𝐿

(𝛼𝑆 − 𝜂) ,

̂𝜈𝑆

(G.14)

Similarly, a long-term firm does not have an incentive to deviate to
a greater 𝜏 nor to a marginally lower 𝜏. This is because a deviating
)
(𝛼𝑆
firm’s 𝜆 is just 𝜆𝐿
by construction. Hence, long-term firms do not have an incentive to
deviate if

)
, and the deviation cannot dominate 𝜏∗
𝐿

(𝛼𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

̂𝜈𝐿

) ≥ max
𝜏𝑛≤𝜏∗

𝐿(𝛼𝑆 )

𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) −  (𝜏𝑛, 𝜆𝑛) .

(G.15)

where 𝜆𝑛 solves short-term investors’ indifference condition

(1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝜏𝑛𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚)

(

1 − 𝜏𝑆 𝛾) , for all 𝑚 ∈ 

𝑆 .

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388427J. Dow et al.

Notice that Eq. (G.15) can be equivalently written as

As in Proposition 2, the Envelope theorem implies

)

̂𝜈𝐿

(𝜏𝑠

(𝛼𝑆

(𝜏∗
𝑆

) ≥ 𝜈𝑆

(𝛼𝑆
) , 𝜏∗
(𝛼𝑆
Therefore, 𝑁𝑆 , 𝜏∗
𝐿
𝑆
and Eq. (G.16) hold.

; 𝛼𝑆 + 𝜂) , 𝜏∗
)
(𝛼𝑆

𝑆

(𝛼𝑆

) , 𝛼𝑆 + 𝜂) .

(G.16)

is an equilibrium if both Eq. ((G.14))

Next, we prove that, for 𝛼𝑆 = 𝛼∗, both Eq. ((G.14)) and Eq. (G.16)
hold. Eq. (G.14) holds because ̂𝜈𝑆 (𝛼∗) = ̂𝜈𝐿 (𝛼∗) and ̂𝜈𝑆 is decreasing.
Eq. (G.16) holds because

=

(𝛼∗)

̂𝜈𝐿

= ̂𝜈𝑆

(𝛼∗)

= 𝜈𝑆

(𝜏𝑠

(𝜏∗
𝑆

(𝛼∗)

; 𝛼∗ + 𝜂) , 𝜏∗

𝑆

(𝛼∗) , 𝛼∗ + 𝜂)

|𝜂=0,

𝜕 ̂ 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝜎𝐻 𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

)

𝐺 −
𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝐺
(

( 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) − (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿
( 𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) − (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿
𝑢(𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝐺 )

]
− 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝜌𝐻 𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆

+ 𝜓𝑘

𝑤∗∗𝑛

)

)

− 𝜓𝑘
[

)

𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆

)

𝜎𝐻

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝛥𝜎
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜎𝐻
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 ),

𝐺 − 𝜓𝑘

(H.6)

(G.17)

where the second equality is due to the first-order conditions in
Eq. (H.5). Using Eq. (H.5), we can alternatively represent Eq. (H.6) as

and, by the Envelope Theorem and the fact that the wage bill is
decreasing in price efficiency, and price efficiency is decreasing in the
number of firms, the RHS of Eq. (G.16) is decreasing in 𝜂.

𝜕 ̂ 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =

Finally, consider the case where the integer constraint on 𝑁𝑆 is
𝑆 ∕𝑁 < 𝛼∗ < (𝑁 ∗
𝑆 be such that 𝑁 ∗
taken into account. Let 𝑁 ∗
∕𝑁
(𝑁 ∗
and define 𝛼− = 𝑁 ∗
∕𝑁. For 𝑁 finite but suffi-
ciently large, the distance between 𝛼− and 𝛼+ can be made arbitrarily
small. We can verify numerically that either 𝑁 ∗
𝑆 + 1 are an
equilibrium.

𝑆 ∕𝑁 and 𝛼+ =

𝑆 or 𝑁 ∗

𝑆 + 1

𝑆 + 1

)

)

This concludes the proof.

■

[

(

𝜎𝐻

𝑤∗∗𝑛

𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜎
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 ),

𝐺 −

)

𝑢(𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝐺 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 )

− 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 )

]

(H.7)

which is equal to Eq. (B.11) if salary cap does not bind, i.e., Eq. (H.7)
becomes
𝜕 ̂ 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =

]
𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 )

(H.8)

𝜕𝜆𝑛
[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 ),

Appendix H

Then, similarly as in Eq. (B.18), we can derive

∅

𝐹 = 𝑤∗∗𝑛

𝐵 = 𝑤∗∗𝑛

Proof of Proposition 10. The proof is parallel to that of Proposition 2
except that there are extra constraints due to the salary cap in Eq. (43).
Using the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 2, we can
find that 𝑤∗∗𝑛
= 0, and also drop the non-negativity
constraints. Furthermore, because 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 (Lemma B.5) under the
optimal contract without salary cap, it is always the case that the
constraint on 𝑤𝑛
𝐺 and 𝑤𝑛
𝑆 .
Therefore, to ensure that the incentive compatibility is implementable,
≤ ̄𝑤 never binds. Then, under such
it has to be the case that 𝑤𝑛
𝑆
̄𝑤, the optimal contracting problem becomes as
parametric values of
follows:

𝐺 binds first between the two constraints on 𝑤𝑛

𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛

̂ 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) ≡

min
,𝑤𝑛

𝑆 }∈R2
+

{𝑤𝑛
𝐺

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝑛
𝑆 ,

(H.1)

subject to the binding IC constraint (16):

𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝐺

)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝑆

)

= 𝐾,

and the salary cap from Eq. (43):

𝑤𝑛
𝐺

≤ ̄𝑤.

Then, the Lagrangian is given by

(H.2)

(H.3)

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝑛
 =𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛
𝐾 − 𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
[
−(1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

+ 𝜓𝑘

)

𝐺

𝑆

𝑆

]

)

+ 𝜓𝑤

( ̄𝑤 − 𝑤𝑛

𝐺

) ,

(H.4)

where 𝜓𝑘, 𝜓𝑤 are the Lagrangian multipliers, which are non-negative.
When the constraint in Eq. (H.3) does not bind (𝜓𝑤 = 0 and 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 <
̄𝑤), the optimization problem degenerates to the same problem in
Proposition 2, i.e., 𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝐺 and 𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 . When it binds (𝜓𝑤 > 0
and 𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 = ̄𝑤), the solution is given by

𝐺 = 𝑤𝑛∗

𝑆 = 𝑤𝑛∗

𝑤∗∗𝑛

𝐺 = ̄𝑤,

and 𝑤∗∗𝑛

𝑆 = 𝑢−1

( 𝐾 − 𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢( ̄𝑤)

(1 − 𝜆𝑛) (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛥𝜌

)

.

The first-order conditions derived from Eq. (H.4) become

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 − 𝜓𝑘𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢′(𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝜌𝐻 − 𝜓𝑘𝛥𝜌𝑢′(𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 ) = 0.

𝐺 ) − 𝜓𝑤 = 0,

𝜕2 ̂ 𝑛
(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2

=

𝜕2𝜆𝑛
(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

−

+

[

(

𝜎𝐻

̄𝑤 −

𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜎

𝑢( ̄𝑤)
𝑢′(𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 )

)

]
− (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
[ 𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻
𝛥𝜎

𝑆 ) + (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝜏𝑛 − (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝛹 ′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝑢( ̄𝑤)
𝑢′′(𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 )

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆
𝜕𝜏𝑛

]

.

(H.9)

Because 𝜕2𝜆𝑛∕(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2 is negative (Proposition 1), Eq. (B.17) implies that
the first term in Eq. (H.9) is positive. Because 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is positive
(Proposition 1), and 𝛹 (⋅) is negative (Eq. (B.12)), the second term in
Eq. (B.18) is also positive. Because 𝛹 ′(⋅) is negative (Eq. (B.13)) and
𝜕𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 ∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is negative (Lemma B.5), the third term is also positive.
In case the constraint binds, 𝜓𝑤 > 0, which in turn implies that 𝜓𝑘
is greater than the case the constraint does not bind due to Eq. (H.5).
Then, Eq. (H.6) further implies that the marginal increase in the wage
bill ̂ 𝑛 with respect to an increase in 𝜏𝑛 is greater under salary cap
than without salary cap at any level of maturity 𝜏𝑛, i.e.,

𝜕 ̂ 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

<

=

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
𝜕𝜆𝑛
[𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛

𝑆 ) < 0,

]
𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝑆 )

(H.10)

where the equality is due to Eq. (B.11), and the last inequality is due
to Lemma B.6. When 𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝐺 < ̄𝑤, the first inequality holds with equality
in Eq. (H.10). When 𝑤∗∗𝑛
𝐺 = ̄𝑤, and the first inequality holds strictly.

𝐺 = 𝑤∗∗𝑛

In a symmetric equilibrium defined in Definition 1 but with salary
𝐺 and 𝑤∗∗
cap, all firms choose the same contract, denoted by 𝑤∗∗
𝑆
for all 𝑛 ∈  ). They also choose
𝑆 = 𝑤∗∗𝑛
(i.e., 𝑤∗∗
the same maturity, denoted by 𝜏∗∗, and thus, we have 𝜆𝑛 = 1∕(𝑁 ̄𝑧) for
all 𝑛 ∈  in equilibrium. Therefore, given the equilibrium choice of
𝜏∗∗, Eq. (H.7) should be equal to

and 𝑤∗∗

𝐺

𝑆

𝜕 ̂ 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

|
|
|
|𝜏𝑛=𝜏∗∗

(H.5)

[

(

=𝛩(𝜏∗∗)

𝜎𝐻

𝑤∗∗

𝛥𝜎𝜌𝐻
𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌
+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛿𝜌𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗
𝑆 ).

𝐺 −

𝑢(𝑤∗∗
𝐺 )
𝑢′(𝑤∗∗
𝑆 )

)

]
− 𝜌𝐻 (1 − 𝛿𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗∗
𝑆 )

(H.11)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388428J. Dow et al.

Now, we prove that 𝜏∗∗ < 𝜏∗ under a symmetric equilibrium when
the salary cap binds. As in Theorem 1, the equilibrium maturity 𝜏∗∗
under salary cap is determined by trading off between production and
managerial compensation:

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗∗) =

𝜕 ̂ 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

|
|
|
|𝜏𝑛=𝜏∗∗

.

(H.12)

On the other hand, the equilibrium maturity 𝜏∗ without salary cap is
determined by
𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

𝑓 ′(𝜏∗) =

(H.13)

.

|
|
|
|𝜏𝑛=𝜏∗

Because 𝑓 ′(⋅) is negative and increasing and 𝜕 ̂ 𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 < 𝜕 𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 < 0
whenever 𝑤∗∗
𝐺 = ̄𝑤, Eqs. (H.12)–(H.13) imply that 𝜏∗∗ > 𝜏∗ whenever
the salary cap binds in equilibrium. Note that 𝜏∗∗ = 𝜏∗ when it does
not bind.

Finally, it is straightforward to show that, fixing the choice of
maturity 𝜏∗∗ = 𝜏∗, the shareholder value is greater for the case
without salary cap because the cost of compensation is smaller or
equal to the case under salary cap (recall that the contracting problem
under salary cap features one more constraint in the optimization
problem.) Theorem 2 shows that the equilibrium maturity choice under
endogenous choice without salary cap is already excessively short-term.
Given the concavity of the shareholder value in the social planner’s
problem, the shareholder value becomes even lower as the maturity
shortens (i.e., 𝜏∗ increases). But our result shows that the choice under
salary cap is even more short-term than that without salary cap, which
implies that the shareholder value should be lower under the salary cap.

Appendix I

Optimal Managerial Compensation with Hidden Choice of

Project Maturity

In this appendix, we assume that the manager chooses the project
duration and that this choice is private information of the manager. We
further assume that the manager’s compensation contract can depend
on the timing of the project’s payoff (i.e., whether the project pays
off early or late).51 In this scenario, shareholders offer an incentive
compatible compensation contract that specifies the project duration
𝜏𝑛 that the manager will choose. The contract is observed by investors
before they decide on which stock they will acquire information.

Compared to Section 4.2, the number of states that are relevant
for contract expands. Using a similar argument as in the main model,
however, we can show that: (i) the optimal contract does not depend
on the timing of the payoff realization when the price reveals the signal
to be good, and (ii) the optimal contract pays nothing to the manager
when (a) the price reveals the signal to be bad, (b) the price is not
revealing and the manager exits before the project pays off, or (c) the
price is not revealing and the project fails (regardless of whether it
realizes early or late). However, if the price is non-revealing and the
project is successful, the optimal contract differentiates between an
early realization of the payoff (with corresponding payment 𝑤𝑛
) and
𝑆1
a late realization of the payoff in case the manager does not exit early
(with corresponding payment 𝑤𝑛
).
𝑆2

The following proposition derives the optimal contract for a given

choice of 𝜏𝑛.

Proposition I.11 (Optimal Managerial Contract with Hidden Choice of
Project Maturity). Given 𝜏𝑛, there exists a unique optimal contract. For
𝐹 = 𝑤∗𝑛
the optimal contract, 𝑤∗𝑛
> 0 and

= 0 and 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐵 = 𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

∅

51 More generally, the size of the cash flows at liquidation can also signal
the manager’s choice of 𝜏. For simplicity, however, we assume that the size of
the cash flows is not contractible.

> 0, where 𝑤∗𝑛

and 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

simultaneously solve

𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

> 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

)

𝐺 , 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1
(

)

𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢
[

= 𝐾
]

𝜎𝐻
𝜌𝐻

=

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

= 𝑢−1

𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

)

( 𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
(1 − 𝛿)

1 − 𝜏𝑛
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1
)

.

+

)

𝜏𝑛
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

)

(I.1)

(I.2)

(I.3)

Furthermore, if 𝑢(𝑥) = 𝑥1−𝛼
1−𝛼

, the wage bill  𝑛 is increasing in 𝜏𝑛.

= 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

For 𝛿 = 0, Eq. (I.3) implies 𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

. Intuitively, when the man-
ager is long-lived any project maturity is incentive compatible because
the manager is indifferent about the timing of the compensation. In this
case, the optimal contract is identical to the case where shareholders
choose 𝜏 (or, equivalently, to the case where the manager chooses 𝜏
and this choice is contractible). By contrast, for 𝛿 > 0 Eq. (I.3) implies
𝑤𝑛
. Intuitively, the late compensation must exceed the early
𝑆2
compensation for an impatient manager to be indifferent among project
maturities. Proposition I.11 shows that the main qualitative feature of
the optimal contract in the main model (Proposition 2), that a decrease
in the project duration reduces the wage bill, is robust to the case where
the manager chooses 𝜏 and this choice is private information.

> 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

Proof of Proposition I.11. Using a similar argument as in the main
model, we can show two preliminary results. First, the optimal contract
does not differentiate between early and late realization of the payoff
when the price reveals a good signal. This follows from the first-order
conditions for the shareholder’s problem. Second, the optimal contract
does not differentiate between early and late realization of the payoff
when the price reveals a bad signal or the project is unsuccessful. In
these cases, all payments must be zero or shareholders could reduce
the wage bill without affecting the manager’s incentives. Incorporating
these features of the optimal contract, the shareholders’ wage bill is
given by
[𝑤𝑛]

(I.4)

= 𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻

[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

+ 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

E

]

.

An optimal contract minimizes the shareholders’ wage bill:

 𝑛(𝜏𝑛) ≡

{𝑤𝑛
𝐺

min
,𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

,𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

}

[𝑤𝑛] ,

E

(I.5)

subject to (i) the manager’s participation constraint (PC):

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝐺

)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻

[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

) + 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

]
)

≥ 𝐾,

(ii) the manager’s incentive compatibility constraint (IC):
]
𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻

[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

) + 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

)

𝐺

− 𝐾

≥ max{ ̂𝑢𝐻 , ̂𝑢𝐿},

where we define

̂𝑢𝐻 = max
𝜏∈[0,1]

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝐺

)

+(1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻

[

(1 − 𝜏)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

) + 𝜏(1 − 𝛿)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

(I.6)

(I.7)

]
−𝐾,
)

(I.8)

and

̂𝑢𝐿 = max
𝜏∈[0,1]

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐿𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝐺

)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐿

[

(1 − 𝜏)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

) + 𝜏(1 − 𝛿)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

]
)

,

(I.9)

and (iii) the limited liability constraint (LL):

𝑤𝑛

≥ 0.

, 𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

𝐺, 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
Notice that in the RHS of Eqs. (I.8)–(I.9) price informativeness is
not a function of the manager’s choice of 𝜏 because investors do not

(I.10)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388429J. Dow et al.

observe this and they anticipate that the manager will implement the
incentive compatible choice 𝜏𝑛 specified in the contract. Since the RHS
of Eqs. (I.8)–(I.9) are linear in 𝜏, it follows that 𝜏𝑛 ∈ (0, 1) is incentive
compatible if and only if

where

𝛹 (𝑤) ≡ 𝑤 −

𝑢(𝑤)
𝑢′(𝑤)

< 0.

Using Eqs. (I.16)–(I.18) and the definition of 𝛹 , Eq. (I.22) simplifies to

),

𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

) = (1 − 𝛿)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆2
which pins down 𝑤𝑛
𝑆2
( 𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
(1 − 𝛿)

= 𝑔(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

) ≡ 𝑢−1

𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

)

)

.

as a function of 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

:

Therefore, we can rewrite the IC constraint in Eq. (I.7) as
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝐺

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝛥𝜌

≥ 𝐾,

)

)

(
𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

and standard augments imply that the IC constraint must bind.

(I.11)

(I.12)

To solve for (𝑤𝑛

𝐺, 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

the problem as

) in case 𝛿 > 0, we write the Lagrangian for

 = 𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻
[ 𝐾 − 𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝐺
𝑤𝑛
−(1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝛥𝜌𝑢
𝑆1

(

[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
)
]

)

,

+ 𝜓

+ 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)𝑔(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

]
)

where 𝜓 is the Lagrangian multiplier. The first-order conditions with
respect to 𝑤𝑛
𝜎𝐻 − 𝜓𝛥𝜎𝑢′ (𝑤∗𝑛

𝐺 and 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

are given by

= 0,

)

𝐺

𝜌𝐻

[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛) + 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)𝑔′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

]
)

− 𝜓𝛥𝜌𝑢′ (

𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

)

= 0,

(I.13)

which, together with the definition of 𝑔 in Eq. (I.11), implies

[

𝜎𝐻
𝜌𝐻

=

𝛥𝜎
𝛥𝜌

𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 )

1 − 𝜏𝑛
𝑢′(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

)

+

𝜏𝑛
𝑢′(𝑔(𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

))

]

.

An optimal contract is therefore pinned down by {𝑤∗𝑛
solve Eq. (I.11), Eq. (I.14), and the IC constraint
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝑢

= 𝐾.

)

(

)

𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

𝐺 , 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

(I.14)

, 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

} that

(I.15)

show that the optimal contract is unique given 𝜏𝑛 and that 𝑤∗𝑛

Following similar steps as the proof of Proposition 2 we can further
𝐺 > 𝑤∗𝑛
.
𝑆1
Next, we consider the case 𝑢(𝑥) = 𝑥1−𝛼∕(1 − 𝛼). Given our assump-
tion that 𝑢(0) = 0, we restrict our attention to 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1). In this case,
Eqs. (I.11) and (I.14) imply

𝑤∗𝑛
= 𝜅0𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2
𝑆1
𝑤∗𝑛
= 𝜅1𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1
𝐺
𝜅2𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺 = (1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

where
𝜅0 = (1 − 𝛿)− 1

1−𝛼

+ 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

,

1
𝛼

𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌
⎛
𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝜎
⎜
1 − 𝜏𝑛 + 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)− 𝛼
⎜
⎝
( 𝜎𝐻 𝛥𝜌
𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝜎

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
1 − 𝜏𝑛 + 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)− 𝛼

) 1

𝛼 (

1−𝛼

1−𝛼

𝜅1 =

𝜅2 =

(I.16)

(I.17)

(I.18)

(I.19)

(I.20)

(I.21)

)1− 1

𝛼 ,

Since 𝜎𝐺𝛥𝜌 < 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝜎 from Lemma B.4 and 𝛼, 𝛿, 𝜏𝑛 ∈ (0, 1), then it is
immediate to verify that Eqs. (I.19)–(I.21) imply 𝜅0 > 1 and 𝜅1, 𝜅2 ∈
(0, 1).

Next, we prove that  𝑛 is increasing in 𝜏𝑛. Following similar steps
as in the proof of Lemma B.6, we obtain, after some manipulations, that

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 =

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

[

𝐺 ) − 𝜌𝐻

[
𝜎𝐻 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
[
(1 − 𝛿)𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

(1 − 𝜏𝑛) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1
]

− 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

,

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝜌𝐻

) + 𝜏𝑛 (1 − 𝛿) 𝛹 (𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

]]
)

𝑤∗𝑛
𝐺
1 − 𝛼

𝜕𝜆𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛

(𝜎𝐻 − 𝜌𝐻 𝜅2

𝜕 𝑛
𝜕𝜏𝑛 = −
Because 𝜕𝜆𝑛∕𝜕𝜏𝑛 is negative (Proposition 1), and 𝜎𝐻 > 𝜌𝐻 , and 𝜅0 > 1
and 𝜅2 < 1, Eq. (I.23) implies that  𝑛 is increasing in 𝜏𝑛.
■

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛)𝜌𝐻 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

0 − 1

(I.23)

(𝜅𝛼

) .

)

Appendix J

In this appendix we consider how the model solution is affected by
the parameters 𝛼 and 𝛽 introduced in Sections 5.5.1 and 5.5.2. The
assumptions introduced in Sections 5.5.1 and 5.5.2 imply that in case
of success, the component of the payoff that is sensitive to managerial
effort, 𝑅𝑛, equals 𝛥𝑉 if the project pays off early (with probability 𝜏𝑛)
and 𝛥𝑉 1+𝛼
if the project pays off late (with probability (1−𝜏𝑛)(1−𝛽); we
1−𝛽
remark that 𝛽 captures the additional randomization that a successful
project is subject to when it realizes late). In essence, these assumptions
imply that 𝛼 > 0 affects the financial equilibrium and therefore {𝜆𝑛}𝑀
𝑛=1
but leaves firms’ problem unchanged (for given {𝜆𝑛}𝑀
𝑛=1), whereas 𝛽 > 0
has no effect on the financial equilibrium but affects firms’ optimal
compensation contracts.

First, we consider the impact on asset
Proofs for Section 5.5.1.
prices. The only modification to Lemma 1 is that asset prices must
reflect expected liquidation values when 𝛼 > 0 in the project payoff
formulation in Eq. (1). With this assumption, asset prices at 𝑡 = 0 for
the cases where the asset price reveals the bad signal, is not revealing,
or reveals the good signal are, respectively,

𝑃 𝑛
𝐵(0) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐵𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝜏𝛼), 𝑃 𝑛
𝑃 𝑛
𝐺(0) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐺𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝜏𝛼).

∅ (0) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝜏𝛼),

Similarly, the corresponding prices in 𝑡 = 1 if asset 𝑛’s payoff does not
realize early are

𝑃 𝑛
𝐵(1) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐵𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝛼), 𝑃 𝑛
𝑃 𝑛
𝐺(1) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜈𝐺𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝛼).

∅ (1) = 𝑓 (𝜏𝑛) + 𝜌𝐻 𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝛼),

Given these prices, the same steps in the proof of Lemma 2 show that
the expected value of trading in stock 𝑛 for an informed investor is
equal to

𝐽 𝑛
0 = (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(1 − ̂𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝛥𝑃 ,
(J.24)
] 𝛥𝑉 .
where ̂𝛾 = 𝛾 − 𝛼(1 − 𝛾) and 𝛥𝑃 ≡ [𝜎𝐻 (𝜈𝐺 − 𝜌𝐻 ) + (1 − 𝜎𝐻 )(𝜌𝐻 − 𝜈𝐵)
To see how ̂𝛾 is derived, consider the expected profits of an informed
investor with a good signal about firm 𝑛. These equal

(
𝜈𝐺𝛥𝑉 − 𝑃 𝑛

)
∅ (0)

(1 − 𝜆𝑛(0)){(1 − 𝜏𝑛)
+ 𝜏𝑛 [
𝛾

(
)
𝑃 𝑛
∅ (1) − 𝑃 𝑛
∅ (0)
= (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(𝜈𝐺 − 𝜌𝐻 )𝛥𝑉 [

+ (1 − 𝛾)

(
𝜈𝐺𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝛼) − 𝑃 𝑛
] ,

)]
}

∅ (0)

1 − 𝜏𝑛(𝛾 − 𝛼(1 − 𝛾))

(J.25)

where the second line follows by substituting the expressions for 𝑃 𝑛
(1)
∅
and 𝑃 𝑛
(0) into the first line and simplifying. Similarly, consider the
∅
expected profits of an informed investor with a bad signal about firm
𝑛. These equal

)

(1 − 𝜆𝑛(0)){(1 − 𝜏𝑛)
+ 𝜏𝑛 [
𝛾

(
𝑃 𝑛
∅ (0) − 𝜈𝐵𝛥𝑉
)
(
∅ (0) − 𝑃 𝑛
𝑃 𝑛
∅ (1)
= (1 − 𝜆𝑛(0))(𝜌𝐻 − 𝜈𝐵)𝛥𝑉 [

+ (1 − 𝛾)

(
𝑃 𝑛
∅ (0) − 𝜈𝐵𝛥𝑉 (1 + 𝛼)
] .

)]
}

1 − 𝜏𝑛(𝛾 − 𝛼(1 − 𝛾))

(J.26)

Taking expectations of the investor’s profits in Eqs. (J.25) and (J.26)
over good and bad signal realizations yields Eq. (J.24). It is then

(I.22)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388430J. Dow et al.

immediate that investor indifference condition Eq. (11) becomes

(1 − 𝜆𝑛)(1 − 𝜏𝑛 ̂𝛾) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚)(1 − 𝜏𝑚 ̂𝛾),

for any pair of stocks 𝑚, 𝑛 ∈  .

(J.27)

Proofs for Section 5.5.2. Here we consider the effect of the parameter
𝛽 on the manager’s compensation contract. We will show that the
formulation of the problem is equivalent to that of the main model with
the parameter 𝛿 replaced by ̂𝛿 = 𝛿 + 𝛽(1 − 𝛿).

Consider firm 𝑛 ∈  offering a contract to its manager that induces
high managerial effort. We solve the optimal contracting problem
taking maturity choice 𝜏𝑛 and price efficiency 𝜆𝑛 as given. The same
argument as in the proof of Proposition 2 implies that the PC constraint
does not bind, the IC must bind, and the firm sets payments to zero
in case the project fails or the price reveals the bad signal or the
manager leaves early and the project has not paid off. Therefore, the
shareholders’ wage bill equals

[𝑤𝑛]

E

= 𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻

[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

+ 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛽)𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

]

,

(J.28)

where the payments 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
in period 1 and 2 respectively, and an optimal contract solves

condition on the project being successful

, 𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

resources, as discussed in Han and Sangiorgi (2018). Therefore, in this
analysis, we explore how our results may be affected when the cost of
information acquisition is higher or lower for longer maturity projects
(or equivalently, signal precision is lower or higher for longer maturity
projects). Such situations, for example, may arise due to varying levels
of uncertainty between short-term and long-term scenarios.

For simplicity, we assume that the cost of information acquisition
is multiplicative with the trading profit. This is a technical assumption
made solely for tractability, and a more standard assumption would
involve an additive cost to the trading profit. Nevertheless, the primary
economic force arising from the impact of information cost remains
qualitatively unchanged, and this assumption facilitates our analysis by
simplifying calculations.

More specifically, we assume that the trading profit of an informed
trader is multiplied by a factor 0 < 𝜒(𝜏𝑛) ≤ 1, which is a differentiable
function reflecting the cost of information acquisition that depends on
the maturity of firm 𝑛’s project. The benchmark is 𝜒(𝜏𝑛) = 1, but it
may be smaller than one if there exists information acquisition cost
dependent on 𝜏. For example, if gathering long-term information is
more cost-efficient (or less cost-efficient), then 𝜒 ′(𝜏𝑛) is positive (or
negative). Therefore, we will refer to 𝜒(𝜏𝑛) as the long-term information
‘‘scaling factor’’ for notational convenience.

Then, from Eq. (10), the expected value of trading stock 𝑛 is given

min
,𝑤𝑛
,𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
𝑆2

{𝑤𝑛
𝐺

}∈R3
+

[𝑤𝑛] ,

E

such that the IC constraint binds:

by

(J.29)

𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝐺

)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝛥𝜌

[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

) + 𝜏𝑛(1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛽)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

]
)

= 𝐾.

(J.30)

The Lagrangian formulation for this problems is given by

[

 = 𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛

[
𝐾 − 𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛

𝜓

𝐺

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻
)

(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
[
(1 − 𝜏𝑛)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆1

− (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝛥𝜌

+ 𝜏 𝑛(1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛽)𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

]

+

) + 𝜏 𝑛(1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛽)𝑢(𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

]]
)

,

and 𝑤𝑛
𝑆2

where 𝜓 is the Lagrangian multiplier. The first-order conditions with
respect to 𝑤𝑛
𝑆1
𝜌𝐻 − 𝜓𝛥𝜌𝑢′ (
which implies

are given by
𝜌𝐻 − 𝜓𝛥𝜌𝑢′ (

𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

(J.31)

= 0,

= 0;

)

)

𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆1

= 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆2

= 𝑤∗𝑛
𝑆 .

With this simplification, we can reformulate the optimization problem
in Eqs. (J.29)–(J.30) as

min
,𝑤𝑛

𝑆 }∈R2
+

{𝑤𝑛
𝐺

𝜆𝑛𝜎𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝐺 + (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝜌𝐻 𝑤𝑛

𝑆 {1 − 𝜏𝑛 [𝛿 + 𝛽(1 − 𝛿)]},

(J.32)

such that
𝜆𝑛𝛥𝜎𝑢 (𝑤𝑛
𝐺

)

+ (1 − 𝜆𝑛) 𝛥𝜌𝐻 𝑢(𝑤𝑛

𝑆 ) {1 − 𝜏𝑛 [𝛿 + 𝛽(1 − 𝛿)]} = 𝐾.

(J.33)

The optimization problem in Eqs. (J.32)–(J.33) is equivalent to that of
the main model in Eqs. (B.1)–(B.2) with the parameter 𝛿 replaced by
̂𝛿 = 𝛿 + 𝛽(1 − 𝛿).
■

Appendix K

Maturity-Sensitive Cost Efficiency of Information Production
In this appendix, we demonstrate the impact of introducing in-
formation acquisition costs that depend on the maturity of a firm’s
project. Alternatively, this extension can be understood as exploring the
impact of information precision that depends on the maturity (or the
maturity-sensitive information efficiency of informed trading). A higher
cost of information acquisition can be interpreted as lower precision
of information in the context of collecting information using costly

𝐽 𝑛
0 = (1 − 𝜆𝑛)(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝜒(𝜏𝑛)𝛥𝑃 ,

(K.34)

where 𝛥𝑃 is the constant given in Lemma 2. Note that we can denote
𝜆𝑛 = 𝜆𝑛(0) as in the main body of the paper (see Section 4.1) since
the results in Lemma 2 are unaffected by the introduction of this new
feature. This is because it only changes the scale of informed trading
profits once the stock is selected.

We will now take similar steps as those of Proposition 1 from
Section 4.1, but with the additional feature of costly information de-
pendent on project maturities (refer to the proof of Proposition 1 in
Appendix A for the original formulations). Let 𝛬 > 0 be

𝛬 = (1 − 𝜆𝑛)(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝜒(𝜏𝑛) = (1 − 𝜆𝑚)(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑚)𝜒(𝜏𝑚),

for all 𝑛, 𝑚 ∈  . Then, we can write each 𝜆𝑛 as

𝜆𝑛 = 1 −

𝛬
(1 − 𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝜒(𝜏𝑛)

.

(K.35)

By adding Eq. (K.35) for all 𝑛 ∈  and using the informational resource
constraint Eq. (12), we can obtain

𝛬 =

𝑁 ̄𝑧−1
̄𝑧

∑𝑁

𝑛=1

1
(1−𝛾𝜏𝑛)𝜒(𝜏𝑛)

.

(K.36)

Therefore, there exists a unique solution for each 𝜆𝑛 for all 𝑛 ∈  given
{𝜏𝑛}𝑛∈ from Eqs. (K.35)–(K.36).

Now, we characterize under which conditions our results remain
qualitatively identical to the benchmark case. Recall that, in the bench-
mark case, price informativeness 𝜆𝑛 is decreasing and concave in 𝜏𝑛. 𝜆𝑛
is increasing in 𝜏𝑚.

With the addition of maturity-sensitive efficiency, we find that 𝜆𝑛
is decreasing in 𝜏𝑛 and increasing in 𝜏𝑚 as long as the increment of
efficiency in long-term information is not too high (i.e., 𝜒 ′(𝜏𝑛) is not too
high). Furthermore, 𝜆𝑛 remains concave in 𝜏𝑛 regardless of parameter
values. The following set of lemmas demonstrates these findings.

Lemma K.18. 𝜆𝑛 is decreasing in 𝜏𝑛 if 𝜒(𝜏) − (1 − 𝛾𝜏)𝜒 ′(𝜏) > 0, and
increases in 𝜏𝑛 otherwise.

Proof. Now, we prove that, fixing {𝜏𝑚}𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}, 𝜆𝑛 is decreasing and
concave in 𝜏𝑛, where the notation 𝐵 ⧵ 𝐴 is the set difference, defined
as 𝐵 ⧵ 𝐴 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝐵|𝑥 ∉ 𝐴}. For notational convenience, we represent

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388431J. Dow et al.

Eqs. (K.35)–(K.36) as follows:

𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛) = 1 −

𝑁 ̄𝑧−1
𝑥(𝜏𝑛)
̄𝑧
𝑚∈ 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)
where 𝑥(⋅) is a positive function such that

∑

,

𝑥(𝜏) ≡

1
(1 − 𝛾𝜏)𝜒(𝜏)

,

which is increasing in 𝜏 because

𝜕𝑥(𝜏)
𝜕𝜏

=

𝛾(𝜏)
(1 − 𝛾𝜏)2 [𝜒(𝜏)]2

,

where 𝛾(𝜏) is a function of 𝜏 such that

𝛾(𝜏) ≡ 𝛾𝜒(𝜏) − (1 − 𝛾𝜏)𝜒 ′(𝜏).

(K.37)

The first-order derivative of 𝜆𝑛 with respect to 𝜏𝑛 is given by

𝜕𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑛 = −𝐴 ×

𝛾(𝜏) [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]2

(
𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

)2

where 𝐴 is a positive constant such that

𝐴 ≡

( 𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1
̄𝑧

) ∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛}

𝑥(𝜏𝑚).

,

(K.38)

which proves that 𝜆𝑛 is decreasing in 𝜏𝑛 whenever 𝛾(𝜏) is positive, and
increasing otherwise. ■

Lemma K.19. 𝜆𝑛 is concave in 𝜏𝑛 regardless of parameter values.

Proof. Similarly as in Eq. (K.38), the second-order derivative of 𝜆𝑛 with
respect to 𝜏𝑛 is

𝜕2𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
(𝜕𝜏𝑛)2

= −𝐴

= −𝐴

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

2𝛾(𝜏)2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]3 (
(

𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

)
𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

− 2𝛾(𝜏)2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]4

𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

)3

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

2𝛾(𝜏)2 [𝑥(𝜏𝑛)]3 ∑
(
𝑥(𝜏𝑛) + ∑

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)
)3

𝑚∈ ⧵{𝑛} 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

< 0,

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

which proves that 𝜆𝑛 is concave in 𝜏𝑛. ■

Lemma K.20. 𝜆𝑛 is increasing in 𝜏𝑚 if 𝜒(𝜏) − (1 − 𝛾𝜏)𝜒 ′(𝜏) > 0, and
increases in 𝜏𝑚 otherwise.

Proof. Similarly as in Eq. (K.38), we can obtain

𝜕𝜆𝑛(𝜏𝑛)
𝜕𝜏𝑚 =

( 𝑁 ̄𝑧 − 1
̄𝑧

) 𝑥(𝜏𝑛)𝛾(𝜏) [𝑥(𝜏𝑚)]2

[∑

]2

𝑚 𝑥(𝜏𝑚)

> 0,

which yields the desired result. ■

(K.39)

The maturity-sensitive information efficiency 𝜒(𝜏) does not enter
any other place in the model than the above-mentioned places. There-
fore, the results remain qualitatively unchanged as long as 𝜒(𝜏) − (1 −
𝛾𝜏)𝜒 ′(𝜏) > 0 due to the above lemmas. Note that when 𝜒(𝜏) = 1, this
reverts to the benchmark case.

We will now offer interpretations about the condition 𝜒(𝜏) − (1 −
𝛾𝜏)𝜒 ′(𝜏) > 0. This condition is always true when (i) 𝜒(𝜏) is constant
(the benchmark case), (ii) 𝜒(𝜏) decreases in 𝜏 (short-term information
is more efficient), and (iii) 𝜒(𝜏) does not increase too fast (long-
term information is more cost-efficient but not excessively relative to
short-term information).

Another natural way to interpret the condition is to define the

following elasticity for firm 𝑛:

 𝑛 =

𝑑𝜒(𝜏𝑛)
𝑑𝜏

𝜏𝑛
𝜒

.

When the elasticity is higher, the cost-efficiency gain for long-term
information is greater as the maturity increases. When the elasticity
is more negative, the cost-efficiency gain for short-term information is
greater as the maturity decreases.

Using this definition of elasticity, the condition 𝜒(𝜏)−(1−𝛾𝜏)𝜒 ′(𝜏) >

0 that induces short-termism can be represented as

 𝑛 <

𝛾𝜏
1 − 𝛾𝜏

.

(K.40)

Therefore, all our results stay the same qualitatively if and only if  𝑛 is
less than 𝛾𝜏∕(1 − 𝛾𝜏), which represents the likelihood ratio of successful
liquidation of informed trading compared to unsuccessful liquidation
due to short-horizon of informed traders (recall that 𝛾𝜏 = 1−𝛾 +𝛾(1−𝜏),
which is the probability of either informed trader not suffering a liq-
uidity shock or suffering a liquidity shock but the firm pays off earlier).
The right-hand side represents the strength of preference for short-term
trading due to liquidity concerns (or investor short-termism). That is,
for informed investors to prefer long-term information, this elasticity
should be substantially high, especially when there is stronger investor
short-termism. Otherwise, investors will prefer short-term information.
To provide a more concrete illustration of the above discussions, we
introduce a specific parametric example of the model mentioned above.
We assume that

𝜒(𝜏) = 𝑒𝑏𝜏+𝑐 ,

(K.41)

where 𝑏 and 𝑐 are constants that satisfy 0 ≤ 𝜒(𝜏) ≤ 1 for all 𝜏 ∈ [0, 1].
In general, short-term information is more efficient than long-term
information if 𝑏 is negative, and less efficient otherwise. For example,
if the shortest maturity ensures complete information efficiency, we
assume

𝜒(𝜏) = 𝑒−𝑎𝜏 ,

where 𝑎 is a positive constant. Conversely, in the case where the longest
maturity guarantees complete information efficiency, the assumption is

𝜒(𝜏) = 𝑒𝑎(𝜏−1),

where 𝑎 is a positive constant.

By combining the results from Lemmas K.18–K.20 and the insights
from the earlier discussions with the new parametric assumption, we
can derive the following outcome.

Proposition I.12. Under the parametric assumption in Eq. (K.41), our
results remain qualitatively unchanged whenever 𝑏 < 𝛾. When investors are
impatient (𝛾 = 1), our findings are qualitatively consistent regardless of the
sensitivity of information efficiency to maturity (𝑏).

Proof. Using the parametric example in Eq. (K.41), we can represent
Eq. (K.40) as
𝛾
1 − 𝛾𝜏

(K.42)

𝑏 <

.

As the right-hand side of Eq. (K.42) increases with 𝜏, the inequality
holds true if valid at 𝜏 = 0. Therefore, the sufficient condition for the
inequality to be true is 𝑏 < 𝛾. The second statement is an immediate
consequence of the obtained result. ■

The theorem establishes that the short-termism trap inevitably
emerges when short-term information is more efficient (𝑏 < 0). In
scenarios where long-term information is more efficient (𝑏 > 0), the
short-termism trap persists if the sensitivity of information efficiency
to duration is sufficiently small (𝑏 low enough) and investors are
sufficiently impatient (𝛾 high enough). In situations where both infor-
mational sensitivity is high (𝑏 high enough) and investors are patient
enough (𝛾 low enough), the outcome may undergo a qualitative shift,
potentially reversing the short-termism trap. However, even when long-
term information is substantially efficient, a sufficiently strong investor
short-termism can always result in a short-termism trap.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388432J. Dow et al.

In summary, the short-termism trap will arise whenever long-term
information is substantially more efficient. In particular, we can char-
acterize it to be the On the other hand, when long-term information is
substantially more efficient, an opposite situation may arise due to the
extreme informativeness of long-term signals relative to costs.

References

Acharya, V., Xu, Z., 2017. Financial dependence and innovation: The case of public

versus private firms. J. Financ. Econ. 124 (2), 223–243.

Agarwal, V., Vashishtha, R., Venkatachalam, M., 2018. Mutual fund transparency and

corporate myopia. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (5), 1966–2003.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., 2005. Competition and

innovation: an inverted-u relationship. Q. J. Econ. 120 (2), 701–728.

Aghion, P., Van Reenen, J., Zingales, L., 2013. Innovation and institutional ownership.

Amer. Econ. Rev. 103 (1), 277–304.

Antia, M., Pantzalis, C., Park, J.C., 2010. CEO decision horizon and firm performance:

An empirical investigation. J. Corp. Finance 16 (3), 288–301.

Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2015. Corporate investment and stock market

listing: A puzzle? Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (2), 342–390.

Baiman, S., Verrecchia, R.E., 1995. Earnings and price-based compensation contracts
in the presence of discretionary trading and incomplete contracting. J. Account.
Econ. 20 (1), 93–121.

Ball, R., Brown, P., 1968. An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers. J.

Account. Res. 6 (2), 159–178.

Bergstresser, D., Philippon, T., 2006. CEO incentives and earnings management. J.

Financ. Econ. 80 (3), 511–529.

Berk, J.B., van Binsbergen, J.H., 2021. The impact of impact investing. Working paper,
Stanford University Graduate School of Business Research Paper, Law & Economics
Center at George Mason University Scalia Law School Research Paper Series No.
22-008.

Bernstein, S., 2015. Does going public affect innovation? J. Finance 70 (4), 1365–1403.
Bolton, P., Scheinkman, J.A., Xiong, W., 2006. Executive compensation and
short-termist behaviour in speculative markets. Rev. Econ. Stud. 73 (3), 577–610.
Bond, P., Edmans, A., Goldstein, I., 2012. The real effects of financial markets. Annu.

Rev. Finan. Econ. 4, 339–360.

Brochet, F., Loumioti, M., Serafeim, G., 2015. Speaking of the short-term: disclosure

horizon and managerial myopia. Rev. Account. Stud. 20 (3), 1122–1163.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Pedersen, L.H., 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 22 (6), 2201–2238.

Bushee, B.J., 1998. The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment

behavior. Account. Rev. 73 (3), 305–333.

Callen, J.L., Fang, X., 2013. Institutional investor stability and crash risk: Monitoring

versus short-termism? J. Bank. Financ. 37 (8), 3047–3063.

Edmans, A., 2009. Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia. J.

Finance 64 (6), 2481–2513.

Edmans, A., Gabaix, X., Sadzik, T., Sannikov, Y., 2012. Dynamic CEO compensation.

J. Finance 67 (5), 1603–1647.

Fishman, M.J., Hagerty, K.M., 1989. Disclosure decisions by firms and the competition

for price efficiency. J. Finance 44 (3), 633–646.

Foucault, T., Frésard, L., 2019. Corporate strategy, conformism, and the stock market.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (3), 905–950.

Gaspar, J.-M., Massa, M., Matos, P., 2005. The influence of institutional investors on

myopic R&D investment behavior. J. Financ. Econ. 76 (1), 135–165.

Giannetti, M., Yu, X., 2021. Adapting to radical change: The benefits of short-horizon

investors. Manage. Sci. 67 (7), 4032–4055.

Goldstein, I., Ozdenoren, E., Yuan, K., 2013. Trading frenzies and their impact on real

investment. J. Financ. Econ. 109 (2), 566–582.

Gopalan, R., Milbourn, T., Song, F., Thakor, A.V., 2014. Duration of executive

compensation. J. Finance 69 (6), 2777–2817.

Graves, S.B., Waddock, S.A., 1990. Institutional ownership and control: implications for

long-term corporate strategy. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 4 (1), 75–83.

Grossman, S.J., Hart, O.D., 1983. An analysis of

the principal-agent problem.

Econometrica 51 (1), 7–45.

Han, J., Sangiorgi, F., 2018. Searching for information. J. Econom. Theory 175,

342–373.

Hansen, G.S., Hill, C.W., 1991. Are institutional investors myopic? A time-series study

of four technology-driven industries. Strateg. Manag. J. 12 (1), 1–16.

Hardin, G., 1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162 (3859), 1243–1248.
Harris, M., Raviv, A., 2008. A theory of board control and size. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21

(4), 1797–1832.

Hermalin, B.E., 1992. The effects of competition on executive behavior. Rand J. Econ.

23 (3), 350–365.

Holmstrom, B., 1979. Moral hazard and observability. Bell J. Econ. 10 (1), 74–91.
Holmstrom, B., Milgrom, P., 1991. Multitask principal–agent analyses:

Incentive

contracts, asset ownership, and job design. J. Law Econ. Organ. 7, 24–52.

Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1993. Market liquidity and performance monitoring. J. Polit.

Econ. 101 (4), 678–709.

Jacobs, M.T., 1991. Short-Term America: The Causes and Cures of Our Business Myopia.

Havard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

Kang, Q., Liu, Q., 2010. Information-based stock trading, executive incentives, and the

principal-agent problem. Manage. Sci. 56 (4), 682–698.

Keum, D.D., 2021.

Innovation, short-termism, and the cost of strong corporate

governance. Strateg. Manag. J. 42 (1), 3–29.

Kim, H.D., Kim, Y., Mantecon, T., Song, K.R., 2019. Short-term institutional investors

and agency costs of debt. J. Bus. Res. 95, 195–210.

Kim, Y., Su, L.N., Zhu, X.K., 2017. Does the cessation of quarterly earnings guidance

reduce investors’ short-termism? Rev. Account. Stud. 22 (2), 715–752.

Kraft, A.G., Vashishtha, R., Venkatachalam, M., 2018. Frequent financial reporting and

managerial myopia. Account. Rev. 93 (2), 249–275.

Cella, C., Ellul, A., Giannetti, M., 2013. Investors’ horizons and the amplification of

Kyle, A.S., 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53 (6),

market shocks. Rev. Financ. Stud. 26 (7), 1607–1648.

1315–1335.

Chemla, G., Rivera, A., Shi, L., 2022. Too much, too soon, for too long: The dynamics

Ladika, T., Sautner, Z., 2020. Managerial short-termism and investment: Evidence from

of competitive executive compensation. Working paper.

Chemmanur, T.J., Fulghieri, P., 2006. Competition and cooperation among exchanges:
A theory of cross-listing and endogenous listing standards. J. Financ. Econ. 82 (2),
455–489.

Cremers, M., Pareek, A., Sautner, Z., 2020. Short-term investors, long-term investments,
and firm value: Evidence from russell 2000 index inclusions. Manage. Sci. 66 (10),
4535–4551.

Davies, R., Haldane, A.G., Nielsen, M., Pezzini, S., 2014. Measuring the costs of

short-termism. J. Financial Stab. 12 (1), 16–25.

accelerated option vesting. Rev. Finance 24 (2), 305–344.

Latham, S., Braun, M., 2010. Does short-termism influence firm innovation? An
examination of S&P 500 firms, 1990–2003. J. Managerial Issues 22 (3), 368–382.
Lee, J.M., Park, J.C., Folta, T.B., 2018. CEO career horizon, corporate governance,
and real options: The role of economic short-termism. Strateg. Manag. J. 39 (10),
2703–2725.

Levhari, D., Mirman, L.J., 1980. The great fish war: An example using a dynamic

cournot-Nash solution. Bell J. Econ. 11 (1), 322.

Lin, T.C., Liu, Q., Sun, B., 2019. Contractual managerial incentives with stock price

Dechow, P.M., Sloan, R.G., 1991. Executive incentives and the horizon problem. An

feedback. Amer. Econ. Rev. 109 (7), 2446–2468.

empirical investigation. J. Account. Econ. 14 (1), 51–89.

DeGroot, M., 1970. Optimal Statistical Decisions. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Dhaliwal, D.S., Lee, K.J., Fargher, N.L., 1991. The association between unexpected
leverage.

earnings and abnormal security returns in the presence of financial
Contemp. Account. Res. 8 (1), 20–41.

Dow, J., Goldstein, I., Guembel, A., 2017. Incentives for information production in
investment. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 15 (4),

markets where prices affect real
877–909.

Dow, J., Gorton, G., 1994. Arbitrage chains. J. Finance 49 (3), 819–849.
Dow, J., Gorton, G., 1997. Stock market efficiency and economic efficiency: Is there a

connection? J. Finance 52 (3), 1087.

Lundstrum, L.L., 2002. Corporate investment myopia: A horserace of the theories. J.

Corp. Finance 8 (4), 353–371.

Manconi, A., Massa, M., Yasuda, A., 2012. The role of

institutional

investors in

propagating the crisis of 2007–2008. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (3), 491–518.

Mast, E., 2020. Race to the bottom? Local tax break competition and business location.

Am. Econ. J.: Appl. Econ. 12 (1), 288–317.

Milbradt, K., Oehmke, M., 2015. Maturity rationing and collective short-termism. J.

Financ. Econ. 118 (3), 553–570.

Murphy, K.J., 2013. Executive compensation: Where we are, and how we got there. In:
Constantinides, G.M., Harris, M., Stulz, R.M. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
Finance. vol. 2, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 211–356.

Dow, J., Han, J., 2018. The paradox of financial fire sales: The role of arbitrage capital

Nalebuff, B.J., Stiglitz, J.E., 1983. Information, competition and markets. Am. Econ.

in determining liquidity. J. Finance 73 (1), 229–274.

Rev. 73 (2), 278–283.

Dow, J., Han, J., Sangiorgi, F., 2021. Hysteresis in price efficiency and the economics

Nanda, R., Nicholas, T., 2014. Did bank distress stifle innovation during the Great

of slow-moving capital. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34, 2857–2909.

Depression? J. Financ. Econ. 114 (2), 273–292.

Dow, J., Rahi, R., 2003. Informed trading, investment and welfare. J. Bus. 76 (3),

Pathan, S., Haq, M., Faff, R., Seymour, T., 2021. Institutional investor horizon and bank

439–454.

Dye, R.A., 1993. Auditing standards, legal liability, and auditor wealth. J. Polit. Econ.

101 (5), 887–914.

risk-taking. J. Corp. Finance 66, 101794.
Peress, J., 2010. Product market competition,

efficiency. J. Finance 65 (1), 1–43.

insider trading, and stock market

Echenique, F., Edlin, A., 2004. Mixed equilibria are unstable in games of strategic

Perry, M.K., 1984. Scale economies, imperfect competition, and public policy. J. Ind.

complements. J. Econom. Theory 118 (1), 61–79.

Econ. 32 (3), 313.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388433J. Dow et al.

Piccolo, A., 2022. The earnings game. Kelley School of Business Research Paper No.

Strobl, G., 2014. Stock-based managerial compensation, price informativeness, and the

2021-2022.

Porter, M.E., 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Free Press, New York.
Porter, M.E., 1992. Capital disadvantage: America’s failing capital investment system.

incentive to overinvest. J. Corp. Finance 29, 594–606.

Thakor, R.T., 2021. Short-termism, managerial talent, and firm value. Rev. Corp.

Finance Stud. 10 (3), 473–512.

Harv. Bus. Rev. 70 (5), 65–82.

Thanassoulis, J., 2013. Industry structure, executive pay, and short-termism. Manage.

Raith, M., 2003. Competition, risk, and managerial incentives. Amer. Econ. Rev. 93

Sci. 59 (2), 402–419.

(4), 1425–1436.

Tirole, J., 2006. The Theory of Corporate Finance. Princeton University Press, Princeton,

Scharfstein, D., 1988. Product-market competition and managerial slack. Rand J. Econ.

N.J..

19 (1), 147.

Topkis, D., 1998. Supermodularity and Complementarity. Princeton University Press,

Schmidt, K.M., 1997. Managerial incentives and product market competition. Rev. Econ.

Princeton, N.J.

Stud. 64 (2), 191–213.

Varas, F., 2018. Managerial short-termism, turnover policy, and the dynamics of

Shavell, S., 1979. Risk sharing and incentives in the principal and agent relationship.

incentives. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (9), 3409–3451.

Bell J. Econ. 10 (1), 55–73.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1990. Equilibrium short horizons of investors and firms. Am.

Econ. Rev. 80 (2), 148–153.

Von Beschwitz, B., Lunghi, S., Schmidt, D., 2022. Fundamental arbitrage under the
microscope: Evidence from detailed hedge fund transaction data. Rev. Asset Pricing
Stud. 12 (1), 199–242.

Sockin, M., Xiong, W., 2015. Informational frictions and commodity markets. J. Finance

Xiong, Y., Jiang, X., 2022. Economic consequences of managerial compensation contract

70 (5), 2063–2098.

disclosure. J. Account. Econ. 73 (2–3), 101489.

Stein, J.C., 1989. Efficient capital markets,

inefficient firms: A model of myopic

Yan, X.S., Zhang, Z., 2009. Institutional investors and equity returns: Are short-term

corporate behavior. Q. J. Econ. 104 (4), 655–669.

institutions better informed? Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (2), 893–924.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388434