Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The reserve supply channel of unconventional monetary policy✩
William Diamond a,∗, Zhengyang Jiang b,c, Yiming Ma d
a Finance Department, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, United States of America
b Finance Department, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, United States of America
c NBER, United States of America
d Finance Division, Columbia Business School, 665W 130th St, New York, NY 10027, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We find that central bank reserves injected by QE crowd out bank lending. We estimate a structural model
with cross-sectional instrumental variables for deposit and loan demand. Our results are determined by the
elasticity of loan demand and the impact of reserve holdings on the cost of supplying loans. The reserves
injected by QE raise loan rates by 7.4 basis points, and each dollar of reserves reduces bank lending by 7.7
cents. Our results imply that a large injection of central bank reserves has the unintended consequence of
crowding out bank loans because of bank balance sheet costs.

Dataset link: The Reserve Supply Channel of Un
conventional Monetary Policy (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G21
G28

Keywords:
Financial intermediation
Quantitative easing
Deposit competition
Balance sheet cost
Structural estimation

1. Introduction

There has been a massive expansion of central bank reserves in the
last 15 years. In the US, reserves amounted to less than $50 billion
in 2008Q1, but reached $2.8 trillion in 2015 and exceeded $3 trillion
in 2021 (Fig. 1). These reserves were created in the aftermath of the
2008–2009 financial crisis and the 2020 Covid-19 pandemic, when the
Federal Reserve conducted trillions of dollars worth of Quantitative
Easing (QE). In QE, the Federal Reserve buys assets such as Treasuries,
which are primarily held outside of the banking sector.1 The Federal
Reserve then pays with reserves, which are an interest-bearing asset
that can only be held within the banking system. QE therefore results
in a net injection of liquid assets to bank balance sheets. While a
large literature has studied the effect of QE’s asset purchases, less is
known about how QE’s injection of reserves impacted the functioning
of the banking system. We document the unintended consequence that

reserves crowd out bank lending to the real economy, i.e., the ‘‘reserve
supply channel’’.

In principle, an increase in the supply of central bank reserves
could either increase or decrease bank lending, motivating the need for
empirical analysis. If holding illiquid assets like mortgages and loans
funded by runnable deposits raises the risk of a bank run, increasing
the supply of liquid reserves could reduce the risk of runs and increase
banks’ ability to lend. Conversely, regulatory constraints like the lever-
age ratio can make it costly for banks to expand their asset holdings
so that a bank which holds more reserves will want to reduce its
lending.

Aggregate time series evidence suggests that QE’s injection of re-
serves crowded out bank lending. As reserves increased from $0.02
trillion in 2006Q1 to $3.88 trillion in 2021Q1, the proportion of illiquid
assets such as loans on bank balance sheets declined from 83% to 63%
(see Fig. 1). However, QE was implemented to stimulate the economy

✩

We thank Olivier Darmouni, Mark Egan (discussant), Arvind Krishnamurthy, Giorgia Piacentino, Luke Taylor, Quentin Vandeweyer, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh,
Jessica Wachter, Yufeng Wu (discussant), Yao Zeng, and audiences at Columbia Business School, Durham University, Kellogg, Johns Hopkins, London Business
School, Michigan Ross, NYU Stern, University of Amsterdam, Virgnia Darden Business School, University of Utah, Wharton, ASSA, Chicago Junior Macro and
Finance Conference, Columbia Workshop on New Empirical Methods, ECB Annual Research Conference, EFA, Midwest Finance Association Conference, NYU Stern
New York Fed Intermediation Conference, Yale Junior Macro-Finance Workshop, and WFA for feedback and helpful comments. We thank Naz Koont for excellent
research assistance. This paper was previously circulated under the title ‘‘Monetary Transmission Through Bank Balance Sheet Synergies’’.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: diamondw@wharton.upenn.edu (W. Diamond), zhengyang.jiang@kellogg.northwestern.edu (Z. Jiang), ym2701@gsb.columbia.edu

(Y. Ma).

1 In 2008Q1, only 1.1% of Treasuries outstanding were held by US banks.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103887
Received 9 May 2022; Received in revised form 3 June 2024; Accepted 3 June 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)103887Availableonline21June20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.W. Diamond et al.

Fig. 1. Supply of Central Bank Reserves and Bank Asset Illiquidity.
This figure plots the total reserves of US depository institutions and their ratio of
illiquid to total assets from 1990 to 2021. Illiquid assets include all assets except for
cash, reserves, Fed funds, repos, Treasury securities and agency securities. Data is from
FRED.

during recessions. Thus, the observed substitution away from illiquid
assets could simply reflect a low demand for bank loans rather than
being the direct result of QE itself.

Instead of directly using time series data, we estimate a structural
model with plausibly exogenous instruments to quantify the impact
of QE’s reserve injection. On the demand side, banks compete in
imperfectly competitive markets to provide deposits, loans, and mort-
gages. The supply side of our model is novel since it features flexible
interactions between a bank’s costs of borrowing, lending, and holding
securities. In particular, our specification allows a bank’s cost of lending
to depend on the quantity of reserves it holds. Thus, our framework is
ideally suited to estimating how the banking system’s overall cost and
capacity of providing loans changes when it is forced to hold additional
reserves.

With our estimated model, we show that each dollar of reserves
injected during QE from 2008 to 2017 crowded out 7.7 cents of bank
lending, so the reserve supply channel suggests a counterproductive
reduction in the supply of bank loans. We note that this crowding out
exists in addition to the effects of asset purchases that have been iden-
tified in the literature. Hence, the reserve supply channel is important
in understanding the true effectiveness of QE.

To estimate the demand side of our model, we need to observe
how the quantities demanded from a bank vary when it exogenously
changes its interest rates. We apply an instrument from the reduced-
form literature based on banks’ reallocation of funds in their internal
capital markets after a natural disaster. As Cortés and Strahan (2017)
show, loan demand in a region increases after it is hit by a disaster.
Banks reallocate funds away from non-disaster regions to provide funds
to the disaster region, and this creates an exogenous shock to the
interest rates the bank chooses in non-disaster regions. This reallocation
provides precisely the exogenous interest rate shock needed to estimate
a bank’s loan, mortgage, and deposit demand curves, assuming that
natural disasters do not impact the demand for borrowing and lending
far away from the regions where they occur.

Our estimates show that the demand for bank loans is more interest-
rate sensitive than the demand for deposits and mortgages. If all banks
in a market raise their corporate loan interest rates by 10 basis points
in 2007, the quantity of corporate loans demanded falls by 10.9%.
In comparison, a 10 basis point increase in interest rates would raise
deposit demand by 0.6% and would lower mortgage demand by 3.2%.
If banks change their deposit, loan, and mortgage interest rates by
similar amounts, their loan quantities will respond by a larger amount
than their mortgage or deposit quantities. This explains why we find
that corporate loan quantities respond most to a larger reserve supply.
Next, we estimate the supply side of our model. We need to know
how a bank’s costs depend on the quantities of loans, mortgages,

deposits, and liquid securities on its balance sheet. Estimating this
cost function is challenging because a bank can simultaneously adjust
several components of its balance sheet in response to a demand
shock. We solve this problem by first running a series of reduced-form
regressions of a bank’s marginal costs and balance sheet quantities
on two distinct exogenous demand shocks. In addition to the disaster
instrument mentioned above, we use a Bartik-style instrument for
deposit demand using cross-sectional variation in deposit growth across
regions of the country.2 We separately estimate banks’ cost of holding
liquid securities using daily changes in reserves held in the Treasury
General Account (TGA). Finally, we choose the remaining cost function
parameters to match our reduced-form regressions.

Our estimates imply that increasing a bank’s reserve holdings
crowds out lending and crowds in deposit issuance. In other words,
reserves and bank lending are substitutes rather than complements
for banks. One reason could be that bank balance sheet space is
costly due to regulation. Acharya and Rajan (2021) argue that reserves
may amplify liquidity strains during stress episodes, which may also
render lending more costly. Quantitatively, a $100 million increase in
reserves held by a bank branch increases its marginal cost of providing
mortgages and loans by 39 bps. At the same time, the marginal cost of
deposits decreases by 70 bps.

Finally, we run a counterfactual simulation using our estimated
model to quantify how increases in reserve supply affects lending and
deposit-taking by the banking system. We first shock the reserve supply,
allow each bank to trade reserves and adjust its deposit, loan, and
mortgage rates, and then determine its quantities of loans, mortgages,
and deposits using the demand system. We find that reserve injections
affect the interest rates on loans, mortgages, and deposits to a similar
extent. However, a larger reserve supply predominantly crowds out
bank lending to firms, while the effect on mortgage and deposit quan-
tities is more muted. We estimate that the reserve injections due to QE
from 2008 to 2017 crowded out 7.7 cents of bank lending per dollar
of reserves injected, reducing total lending by $140 billion per year.
Further, we find that the spread between the interest paid on reserves
and risk-free rates available to non-bank investors generated by the
model matches the magnitude and dynamics of a proxy for this spread
in the data. Taken together, our findings imply that requiring banks to
hold the trillions in reserves created by QE causes a counterproductive
reduction in bank lending.
Relation to Literature
Our structural model belongs to a growing recent literature on
structural estimation in banking. Wang et al. (2022) use a structural
model of banking to study conventional monetary policy transmission,
while our structural model estimates the effect of reserve injections
from unconventional monetary policy on the banking system. Several
other papers estimate models of imperfect competition in banking
similar to ours (Egan et al., 2017; Xiao, 2020; Buchak et al., 2018;
Albertazzi et al., 2022), while others estimate models of networks and
matching (Akkus et al., 2016; Schwert, 2018; Craig and Ma, 2022).
Our application of demand systems in banking complements work that
applies demand systems in other financial markets (Koijen and Yogo,
2019, 2020; Koijen et al., 2020; Bretscher et al., 2020; Jiang et al.,
2020). In particular, Koijen et al. (2021) quantify the effect of asset
purchases from QE using a demand system, whereas our focus is on
the reserves injected by QE.

This paper also contributes to the empirical literature on how QE
impacts the banking system. Existing work in this literature has mostly
focused on the effect of asset purchases. For example, Rodnyansky
and Darmouni (2017) and Chakraborty et al. (2020), focus on the

2 In Appendix E, we show that for a firm that sells goods in multiple
markets, demand shocks in one market can be used to estimate both the
demand curves the firm faces in other markets as well as the firm’s marginal
cost curve.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038872W. Diamond et al.

mortgage-backed securities purchased in QE and show that banks with
more mortgage-backed securities increase their mortgage lending by
more relative to those that hold fewer mortgage-backed securities.
Another set of papers study the effect of asset purchases on flattening
the long-term yield curve (Gagnon et al., 2010; Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011).

The effect of reserves supplied by QE has been the focused of
a much smaller literature. Theoretical work by Acharya and Rajan
(2021) argue for the unintended consequence that reserve injections
exacerbate liquidity shortages during financial crises. Christensen and
Krogstrup (2019) find empirically that long-term government yields are
directly impacted by the supply of reserves in QE. Kandrac et al. (2021)
show that banks whose reserve holdings are more sensitive to aggregate
reserve supply lend more than other banks after QE. Kandrac and
Schlusche (2021) show that in a change to deposit insurance fees that
raises the cost of non-deposit borrowing, treated banks decrease their
lending and reserve holding relative to other banks. Unlike previous
work comparing reserve holding and lending across banks, our paper
is the first to quantify the aggregate effect of central bank reserve
injection on the US banking system. We do so with a counterfactual
simulation in our estimated structural model, ensuring that our results
arise only from a change in the aggregate reserve supply like in QE. The
‘‘reserve supply channel’’ we identify points to an important unintended
consequence of central bank reserves in crowding out bank lending
from bank balance sheets that complements the transmission channels
from asset purchases in the literature. Elenev et al. (2021) and Acharya
and Rajan (2021) also find evidence consistent with our reserve supply
channel.

Our work also relates to a recent literature demonstrating the role
of imperfect competition in deposit markets (Drechsler et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2023) and mortgage markets (Scharfstein and Sunderam,
2016) in the transmission of conventional monetary policy. Our work
shows that demand elasticity is an important determinant of the reserve
supply channel, since highly price-elastic corporate loan demand is
impacted much more by reserve supply than deposit and mortgage
demand.

Finally, our results relate to the core idea in banking theory that it
is optimal for banks to simultaneously provide deposits and loans (Di-
amond and Rajan, 2000; Kashyap et al., 2002; Hanson et al., 2015;
Diamond, 2020). Our estimate of a bank’s costs function quantifies the
gains from deposits and loans coming from the same institution rather
than from separate ones.

2. A model of bank balance sheets

This section introduces the theoretical framework that guides our
structural analysis. The goal of the model is to quantify how the
banking system responds to policy interventions, such as an increase
in reserve supply caused by QE. This response depends on two key
model components: the demand that banks face and the balance sheet
costs that banks incur in supplying loans, mortgages, and deposits. We
first provide a graphical illustration of our model in Section 2.1. Then,
in Section 2.2, we formally set up the model and derive the banking
sector’s response to an increase in reserve supply.

2.1. A graphical illustration

We first present a simplified, visual depiction of our model using
a single bank as an illustration. In the model, banks provide loans,
mortgages, and deposits in imperfectly competitive markets. Each bank
faces a demand curve that determines quantities given the interest rate
they choose in each market. In Fig. 2, the loan demand for a given bank,
i.e., the green line, pins down the loan quantity 𝑄𝐿 based on the loan
rate 𝑅𝐿 it chooses. Like any firm facing a downward-sloping demand
curve, banks choose their interest rate so that the marginal cost equals
the marginal revenue. In Fig. 2, the bank chooses the loan rate 𝑅𝐿 at

Fig. 2. This figure illustrates the effect of an increase in reserves on the loan market.
An increase in reserve supply shifts the bank’s marginal cost curve for lending. This
results in a new intersection with the marginal revenue curve, yielding a new interest
rate, 𝑅𝐿′ . The new loan quantity, 𝑄′

𝐿, is then pinned down by the demand curve.

which its marginal cost of supplying loans, i.e., the red line, equals the
marginal revenue from loans lending, i.e., the blue line.

Banks’ holdings of liquid reserves may impact their marginal cost of
lending. For example, having more liquid assets may prevent fire-sales
of illiquid assets and help comply with liquidity regulations. However,
a larger supply of reserves also uses up balance sheet space and may
add to the cost of meeting capital requirements when bank equity is
costly. We will formally set up and estimate a cost function, but for
now, suppose that the increase in reserve supply shifts the marginal
cost of lending as illustrated in Fig. 2, then the bank would raise its
loan rate to 𝑅𝐿′
, at which the new marginal cost meets the marginal
revenue. In the new equilibrium, the quantity of loans supplied by the
bank would drop to 𝑄′
𝐿, as implied by the loan demand curve at the
new loan rate, 𝑅𝐿′
. Hence, the increase in loan rate and the drop in
loan volume as a result of reserve injection would be 𝑅𝐿′
− 𝑅𝐿 and
𝑄𝐿 − 𝑄′

𝐿, respectively.

Our empirical approach to quantify the banking system’s response
to an increase in reserves is similar to the framework in Fig. 2. We
first estimate the loan demand curve, which determines the marginal
revenue. In the full model, banks compete with each other so we extend
the loan demand curve for a single bank to a demand system that
captures how banks’ chosen loan rates affect their own and each other’s
quantities. Next, we estimate a bank’s cost of lending as a function
of its balance sheet composition, i.e., its volume of loans, mortgages,
securities, and deposits. Then, we can infer how an increase in reserve
supply shifts the bank’s marginal cost curve to trace out the equilibrium
change in loan rates and volumes. The same estimation is performed for
deposits and mortgages.

2.2. Model

We consider a set of banks indexed by 𝑚 that operate in a set of
markets indexed by 𝑛 at each time 𝑡. Banks invest in loans, 𝐿, mort-
gages, 𝑀, and liquid securities, 𝑆, backed by deposits, 𝐷. Each bank 𝑚
chooses market-specific rates 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡, and 𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 for its deposits,
mortgages, and loans, respectively. Taking the vector of rates chosen by
their competitor banks as given, banks choose their own rates to maxi-
mize their profits. In terms of loans, for example, bank 𝑚 takes the rates

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038873W. Diamond et al.

𝑡

, 𝑅𝐷,𝑚
𝑡

, and 𝑅𝑆,𝑚

reflecting their respective riskiness.

of its competitor banks −𝑚, 𝑅𝐿,𝑛(−𝑚)𝑡, as given. The quantity of funds
it lends is given by the residual demand curve 𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑅𝐿,𝑛(−𝑚)𝑡).
Similarly, its residual demand curves for mortgages and deposits are
𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑅𝑀,𝑛(−𝑚)𝑡) and 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑅𝐷,𝑛(−𝑚)𝑡). For simplicity,
we suppress the arguments of the residual demand functions, writing
𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡, and 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 going forward. Liquid securities, 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡, trade
in a competitive market at an interest rate 𝑅𝑆,𝑡. Loans, mortgages,
deposits, and securities have cash flows that are discounted at rates
𝑅𝐿,𝑚
𝑡

, 𝑅𝑀,𝑚
𝑡
Banks face a cost 𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡) of providing loans, deposits, and mortgages
that depends on all of the items 𝛩𝑚𝑡 on its balance sheet. 𝛩𝑚𝑡 is a vector
of bank 𝑚’s balance sheet components, 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡, and
𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡. In general, this cost function quantifies the various ways that a
bank’s decisions for one part of its balance sheet can impact its costs for
another. For example, having more liquid securities on balance sheets
may reduce the cost of selling illiquid loans or mortgages in the event of
large deposit withdrawals in a bank run (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983).
In addition, bank regulations such as the Supplementary Leverage Ratio
(which constrains a bank’s leverage) and the Liquidity Coverage Ratio
(which constrains the mismatch between a bank’s holding of illiquid
assets and issuance of liquid deposits) impose costs that depend on
multiple balance sheet components. We show in Section 4 how the
bank’s overall cost depends on the composition of its balance sheet.

In this setting, bank 𝑚 chooses its rates 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡, and 𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
and security quantities 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡 at time 𝑡 to maximize the expected present
value of its profits at 𝑡 + 1 in all markets 𝑛, which are given by

max
(𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡,𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡,𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡,𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡)

∑

𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝐿,𝑚

𝑡

) +

∑

𝑛

𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝐿,𝑚

𝑡

)

+ 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝑆,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑆,𝑚

𝑡

) −

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝐷,𝑚

𝑡

) − 𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡).

(1)

𝑛
∑

𝑛

In words, bank 𝑚’s profits are the sum of its revenue from loans,
mortgages, and securities, less the nominal cost of deposit funding and
the balance sheet costs 𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡). The first order conditions of bank profits
with respect to the choice variables, 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡, and 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡,
are

Marginal Revenue
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
[𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝐷,𝑚

− 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)] =

𝑡

𝜕
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

[𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑚

𝑡

)] =

𝜕
𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕
𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

[𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡(𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝐿,𝑚

𝑡

)] =

𝑅𝑆,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑆,𝑚

𝑡

=

,

,

Marginal Cost
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

.

,

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

The left-hand side of Eqs. (2) to (4) is the marginal revenue from
changing each of the bank’s interest rates (the blue curve in Fig. 2). This
is because the bank’s ‘‘revenue’’ from loans, for example, can be seen as
the quantity 𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 of loans times its interest rate spread 𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝐿,𝑚
above the loan discount rate 𝑅𝐿,𝑚
. On the right-hand side of Eqs. (2)
to (5), we have the marginal costs from changing each of the bank’s
interest rates. Liquid securities are traded in a competitive market, so
the first order condition for securities holdings 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡 in Eqs. (5) sets
price 𝑅𝑆,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑆,𝑚
equal to marginal cost of holding these securities
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
as the ‘‘reserve spread’’—
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡
the difference between risk-free rates 𝑅𝑆,𝑡 available only to banks and
risk-free rates 𝑅𝑆,𝑚

available to non-bank investors as well.

. Based on Eq. (5), we refer to

𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

When the supply of liquid securities increases, as in the increase
in reserve supply from QE, banks respond by optimally changing their
interest rates in all markets as well as their securities holdings. The
interest rates they choose still satisfy the first order conditions in
Eqs. (2) to (5), which allows us to solve for the equilibrium quantities
of loans, mortgages, and deposits. Specifically, the comparative statics

with respect to a change in bank 𝑚’s liquid security holdings 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡 are

(
𝑅𝐷,𝑚

𝑡 − 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 −

𝜕

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

(
𝑅𝑀,𝑚
𝑡

𝜕

𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

− 𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 −

𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡

)

)

𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡

(
𝑅𝐿,𝑚

𝜕

𝑡 − 𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 −

)

𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

=

𝜕2𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝜕𝛩𝑚𝑡

⋅

𝜕𝛩𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

,

𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

= −

𝜕2𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝜕𝛩𝑚𝑡

⋅

𝜕𝛩𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

,

𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

= −

𝜕2𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝜕𝛩𝑚𝑡

⋅

𝜕𝛩𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

,

= 1,

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

,

,

are the responses of each individual bank
where
branch quantity to the reserve increase, and 𝛩𝑚𝑡 is the vector of balance
sheet quantities (𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡). Please see Appendix A.1
for detailed derivations.

To determine the equilibrium response of the banking system to a
change in the supply of liquid securities, we need empirical estimates of
the components of Eqs. (6) to (8). The left-hand side is determined by
the bank’s loan, mortgages, and deposit demand curves. In Section 3,
we estimate this term with an industrial organization style demand
system by observing how each bank’s quantities respond to shocks to
the interest rates they and other banks choose.3 On the right-hand side
is an expression reflecting how a bank’s marginal cost of borrowing or
lending in a market changes with the composition of its entire balance
sheet. We therefore need to estimate how a bank’s marginal costs of
lending and borrowing depend on the different components its balance
sheet. In Section 4, we develop and apply a novel econometric approach
to estimate this cost function. Taken together, our estimates of the
demand for a bank’s services and its cost of providing them allow us to
infer the aggregate effect of an increased supply of reserves caused by
QE—the policy we intend to analyze.

3. Demand systems

This section estimates the demand systems for deposits, mortgages,
and loans. Section 3.1 introduces a modified version of a logit demand
system that can be estimated without observing an outside good.
Section 3.2 details the data and instruments we use for estimating our
demand systems. The estimation results are reported in Section 3.3.

3.1. Estimation strategy

Our first step is to estimate the demand curves that individual banks
face in deposit, loan, and mortgage markets. Depositors can either
invest in deposits at banks 𝑚 > 0 that have branches in the market
or an unobserved outside option 𝑚 = 0. This outside option reflects the
availability of investment options other than deposits that are not in our
data such as money market fund shares. An observed quantity 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
of deposits is invested in bank 𝑚’s branches in time 𝑡 in time 𝑡. In the
standard approach to demand estimation, it is necessary to observe the
quantity invested in the outside option. For our deposit and mortgage
markets, we present a small modification of a logit demand system
that can be consistently estimated only using linear regressions without
observing the outside option quantity. For loans, we apply the standard
logit demand system and assume that the quantity 𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚0 invested in
the loan market outside option is observed.

Preferences of borrowers and depositors for observed goods are
like those in a standard logit demand system (Berry, 1994; McFadden,

3 This section considers a single bank in isolation, while our full model
allows for competition between banks. Thus, we need to estimate a demand
system across all banks rather than just a demand curve faced by an individual
bank.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038874W. Diamond et al.

1974). Depositor 𝑗 investing in bank 𝑚 in time 𝑡 has the following
utility:4

across banks, we estimate it based on how market-level quantities are
impacted by market-level shocks.

𝑢𝐷,𝑗𝑛𝑚𝑡 = 𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝜀𝐷,𝑗𝑛𝑚𝑡.

(10)

The first term is the interest rate 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 paid on deposits times the
depositor’s preference for receiving interest, 𝛼𝐷. We expect the price
disutility parameter for deposits, 𝛼𝐷, to be positive because depositors
should prefer a higher deposit rate, all else equal. In contrast, we
expect the corresponding price disutility parameter for mortgage and
loan borrowers to be negative because they prefer a lower funding
cost. Depositors’ utility is also affected by the desirability of bank
𝑚’s deposits, which depends on a vector of observed characteristics,
𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, preferences for observed characteristics, 𝛽𝐷, and unobserved
characteristics, 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡. Finally, the error term, 𝜀𝐷,𝑗𝑛𝑚𝑡, is assumed to
be i.i.d. across depositors 𝑗 and to follow a type one extreme value
distribution. In addition, the outside good 𝑚 = 0 provides utility

𝑢𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 = 𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 + 𝜀𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡,

(11)

where 𝜀𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 is also type one extreme value and independent of all
other random variables. The additional variable 𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 is i.i.d. across
depositors 𝑗 and has a measure given by the density 𝑓 (𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) =
𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡), where 𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 is a constant that determines the size
of each market.5 The coefficient 𝛽𝐷,𝑜 determines how the total quantity
of deposits in a market changes when the utility 𝑢𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 of all banks’
deposits 𝑚 increases. For loans, where we observe an outside option
quantity, we follow the standard practice in a logit demand model and
normalize 𝛿𝐿,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 = 0 in all loan markets.

Conditional on a value of 𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡, the probability 𝑃𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡|𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡

of agent
j choosing to invest in the branch of bank 𝑚 in time 𝑡 at time 𝑡 satisfies

𝑃𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡|𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡

=

exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)

exp(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) + ∑

𝑚′ exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

(12)

according to Eq. (10) in McFadden (1974). In Appendix A.2.1 we show
over the distribution of 𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 gives the
that integrating 𝑃𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡|𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡
following expression for the quantity 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 chosen from bank m in
market n at time 𝑡

log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = log(𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡) + 𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡.

(13)

Here, 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡) is a market-time specific term that is the same across
banks 𝑚 given in appendix Eq. (A.10) . The demand curve between
the quantity 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 provided by bank m in market n at time 𝑡 and its
interest rate 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 is given by
𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝜕 log(𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡)
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

+ 𝛼𝐷.

(14)

=

To identify this demand curve, we first use the linear expression
in Eq. (13) to estimate 𝛼𝐷, controlling for the impact of 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡) with
market-time fixed effects. Because the unobserved quality 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 of a
bank’s deposit may be correlated with its interest rate (e.g. a bank may
pay a low rate if its ATM network is particularly desirable), we use a
two-stage least squares approach with an instrument 𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡.

3.1.1. Aggregate demand elasticity

Having identified the price disutility parameter, 𝛼𝐷, we now present
in the bank’s
a tractable method to estimate the other term
demand curve. Because 𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡 varies at the market-time level and not

𝜕 log(𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡)
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

4 The demand curves for mortgages and loans are defined similarly. We
use the subscript 𝑀 for mortgages and 𝐿 for loans to describe these demand
systems.

5 This measure has infinite mass and is not a probability measure, as we

discuss in Section 3.1.2. Its value on any interval 𝐼 is ∫

𝐼 𝑓 (𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡)𝑑𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡.

First, we define

𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = log(

∑

𝑚

exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡))

(15)

to represent the desirability of a ‘‘composite good’’ provided by all
(A.18) of
banks operating in the market. We derive in Eq.
Appendix A.2.1 the following log-linear expression for the quantity
𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 of deposits in market n at time 𝑡

log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡) = 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + log

[

∞

𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 ∫

−∞

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝑢)
1 + exp(𝑢)

]

𝑑𝑢

.

(16)

From this equation, we can estimate how log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 changes with the
value of 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 to learn the value of 𝛽𝐷,𝑜. The parameter 𝛽𝐷,𝑜 quantifies
the sensitivity of total deposit quantities to changes in the overall
desirability of deposits.

After estimating the demand parameters (𝛼𝐷, 𝛽𝐷) in Eq. (13), we can
observe all terms in Eq. (15) that defines 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 except the market-time
specific mean of 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 (which is conflated with 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡) in the fixed
effect in Eq. (15)). We therefore decompose 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 into an unobserv-
able component 𝜓 𝑢
𝑚 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 and an observable component
𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 − 𝜓 𝑢
𝐷,𝑛𝑡. Eq. (A.25) in Appendix A.2.3 provides an explicit
expression for 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 in terms of observable data.

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 1
𝑁𝑛𝑡

∑

We use an instrumental variable approach to estimate parameter
𝛽𝐷,𝑜. We need an instrumental variable 𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑡 that impacts 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 and
satisfies a strict exogeneity condition with the unobserved component,
log 𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡+𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓 𝑢
𝐷,𝑛𝑡. Intuitively, this instrument allows us to estimate the
slope 𝛽𝐷,𝑜 of our market-level demand curve by observing how deposit
quantities 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 respond to exogenous changes in the desirability 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡
of deposits. We formally state our identifying assumption and provide
conditions under which our instrument satisfies it in Appendix A.2.5.
After estimating 𝛽𝐷,𝑜, we have all necessary parameter estimates that
determine quantities as shown by Eq. (A.11) in Appendix A.2.3.

3.1.2. Discussion: Demand estimation with an unobserved outside good

Our demand system is nearly identical to the standard logit demand
system (Berry, 1994; McFadden, 1974), except for how it specifies the
utility of choosing an unobserved outside good. Our approach follows
standard practice by estimating Eq. (13) using an instrument to obtain
the parameters 𝛼𝐷 and 𝛽𝐷. Due to the market-time fixed effect we use
following the standard approach, the estimation only uses information
on how differences in goods’ observables determine differences in their
log quantities. The remaining question of how the total quantity of
goods varies with the aggregate desirability of picking an observed
good, as quantified by 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 in Eq. (15), is not directly answered by
this regression.

To determine the aggregate elasticity of demand, our approach
is to choose model parameters that match the data on how market-
level quantities 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 vary with exogenous changes in 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡. The novel
functional form we choose in Eq. (11) makes this estimation problem
a simple linear regression in Eq. (16). Online Appendix A shows that
an approach similar to ours is possible in a standard logit model,
but with a less tractable non-linear functional form. The standard
practice in demand estimation is instead to specify an observed outside
good whose quantity (once 𝛼𝐷 is estimated) determines the aggregate
elasticity of demand.

One key difference between the standard approach and our linear
specification in Eq. (16) is that log-quantities can increase arbitrarily
much as the quality 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 of goods goes to ∞. This is a property of any
demand system where log-quantities are linear in a measure of goods’
quality, since an increasing linear function has no upper bound. As a
result, Eq. (11) must use a measure with infinite mass to specify con-
sumers’ preferences for the outside good, so that an unbounded number
of consumers are available to potentially buy products. Nevertheless,

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038875W. Diamond et al.

we obtain a well-defined finite quantity purchased for all observable
goods, as we verify formally in Appendix A.2.1–A.2.2.

Our demand system specification may have broader applications
outside of our specific banking context. The choice of an outside good
in demand models is often a difficult and sometimes arbitrary decision,
and this decision plays a crucial role in determining the aggregate
elasticity of demand. Like a standard logit model, our specification
has the convenient property that 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 represents the desirability of a
composite good reflecting all available choices other than the outside
good. If a researcher can empirically observe how total quantities
respond to exogenous shocks to 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡, they can use this variation to
measure the market-level elasticity of demand instead of specifying
an outside good. In our application, we are interested in the response
of aggregate deposit, mortgage, and loan quantities to an injection of
central bank reserves, which is why we need the above approach to
obtain aggregate demand elasticities.

3.2. Instruments and data

Estimating our demand systems requires information on deposits,
mortgages, loans, and bank characteristics. In addition, we construct
an instrumental variable from property damage data. We first intro-
duce the data we use and then explain how our instrument is con-
structed. Summary statistics for the demand-side variables are reported
in Table 1.

Deposits. Branch-level deposit volumes are obtained from the FDIC,
which covers the universe of US bank branches at an annual frequency
from June 2001 to June 2017. We exclude branches that consolidate
deposits in another location, do not accept deposits, or are owned by
foreign banks. We define each county-year as a deposit market and sum
branch-level deposits at the bank-county-year level. Our sample is from
2001 to 2017. Table 1 reports the summary statistics.

Branch-level deposit rates are obtained from RateWatch, which col-
lects weekly branch-level deposit rates by product. Data coverage varies
by product, especially in the earlier years. To maximize the sample size,
we focus on the most commonly available savings account type, which
is the 10 K money market account. We compute the average rate at the
bank-county-year level from June 2001 to June 2017 (if there is more
than one branch), which we match with the total bank-county-year
level deposit volume from the FDIC.

The branch-level

is
matched to the branch-level identifier in the FDIC data (uninumbr)
using the mapping file developed by Bord (2017).6

in RateWatch (accountnumber)

identifier

Mortgages. We use data on mortgage originations made available
under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The data available
to us is at the annual frequency and includes information on the
lender, loan size, location of the property, loan type, and loan purpose.
Any depository institution with a home office or branch in a Central
Business Statistical Area (CBSA) is required to report data under HMDA
if it has made or refinanced a home purchase loan and has assets above
$30 million. As explained by Cortés and Strahan (2017), the bulk of
residential mortgage lending activity is likely to be reported under this
criterion.7 We define each county-year as a mortgage market and sum
mortgage loan volumes at the bank-county-year level. Our sample is
from 2001 to 2017.

County-level mortgage rates are obtained from RateWatch, which
collects weekly branch-level mortgages rates by product. Data coverage
varies by product, especially in the earlier years. To maximize the
sample size, we focus on the most commonly available mortgage loan

product, which is the 15-year fixed rate mortgage. We compute the
average mortgage rate at the bank-county-year level from 2001 to 2017
to match with the reporting of the mortgage volume data from HMDA.
We first merge bank-level identifiers in HMDA to the FDIC bank-
level identifiers using the mapping file developed by Bob Avery.8 Then,
the branch-level identifier in the FDIC data (uninumbr) is merged with
the branch-level identifier in RateWatch (accountnumber) using the
mapping file developed by Bord (2017).

Loans. We use data on syndicated loans from the Thomson Reuters
Dealscan database. We select all loans originated by US banks and sum
loan volumes at the bank-state-year level, where the location of the
borrower is given in Dealscan. We define loan markets at the state-year
level instead of the county-year level because firm borrowers tend to
be less geographically confined than individual depositors. Similarly,
we compute average loan spreads and total loan quantities at the
bank-state-year level. Our sample is from 2001 to 2017.

We build on the mapping file used in Chakraborty et al. (2018) to
hand-match lenders in Dealscan to Call Report bank identifiers (RSSD).9
Bank Characteristics. We use the Call Reports to obtain bank-level
characteristics as control variables. Specifically, we calculate the ratio
of insured deposits as insured deposits over total liabilities and the
ratio of loan loss provision as loan loss provisions over total loans. We
average 4 quarterly observations to obtain bank-year level data from
2001 to 2017.

Property losses from natural disasters. We use the Spatial Hazard
Events and Losses Database for the United States (SHELDUS) to obtain
data on property losses from natural disasters. This dataset records the
location, time, and damage brought about by natural disasters in the
US. We include all reported disasters in the database and calculate the
total property losses for each county-year from 2001 to 2017 for our
instrument.

Instruments. We first explain our instrument, 𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, for estimating
our demand systems. We face the endogeneity problem that banks’
choices of interest rates for deposits, mortgages, and loans may be cor-
related with unobservables that affect demand for the bank’s products.
With an instrument that impacts interest rates but that is uncorrelated
with unobservable demand shifters, we can estimate the price disutility
parameter of our demand systems, exploiting the linearity of Eq. (13).
Following (Cortés and Strahan, 2017), we construct the instrument
based on property losses from natural disasters and banks’ branch net-
works. As Cortés and Strahan (2017) show, natural disasters increase
the demand for loans in the area where they occur, which means
that banks present in the area reallocate funds from their branches
elsewhere through their internal capital markets. Hence, property losses
to bank 𝑚’s branches in regions 𝑛′ constitute a supply shock to bank 𝑚’s
branches in county 𝑛, which allows us to trace out the demand curves.
Appendix E formalizes this argument.

Formally, our natural disaster instrument 𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 measures for bank
𝑚’s branches in county 𝑛 and year 𝑡 the property losses from natural
disasters accrued to the bank’s branches in all other counties 𝑛′:

𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 =

1
𝑁𝑚𝑡

log

(

∑

𝑛′≠𝑛

𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛′𝑡 ⋅

∑

)

,

𝑁 𝐵
𝑛′𝑚𝑡
𝑚′ 𝑁 𝐵

𝑛′𝑚′𝑡

where 𝑁𝑚𝑡 is the number of counties in which bank 𝑚 has branches, and
𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛′𝑡 is the property loss in county 𝑛′. Following Cortés and Stra-
han (2017), we scale 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛′𝑡 by the fraction of branches belonging
to bank 𝑚 in county 𝑛′ and take logs after summing the scaled damage
losses. The former adjustment captures the portion of the demand
shock in county 𝑛′ absorbed by branches of bank 𝑚, while the latter
ensures that the largest shocks (e.g. Hurricane Katrina) do not drive the

6 Special thanks to Vitaly Bord for sharing the mapping file with us.
7 Any non-depository institution with at least 10% of its loan portfolio
composed of home purchase loans must also report HMDA data if its asset size
is above $ million. These institutions are not included in our sample given our
focus on deposit-taking commercial banks.

8 The version we used is available here https://sites.google.com/site/

neilbhutta/data

9 Special thanks to Indraneel Chakraborty, Itay Goldstein, and Andrew

MacKinlay for sharing the mapping file with us.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038876W. Diamond et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics (Market-Bank-Year Level).
This table reports summary statistics of bank deposits, mortgages, and loans at the market-bank-year level. Rates are reported in basis points
and volumes are in millions. For a given variable, #Obs refers to the total number of observations. The sample period is from 2001 to 2017.

Log Deposit Market Share
Deposit Volume
Deposit Rate

Log Mortgage Market Share
Mortgage Volume
Mortgage Rate

Log Loan Market Share
Loan Volume
Loan Rate

# Obs

105 551
105 551
105 551

75 470
75 470
75 470

23 393
23 393
23 393

Mean

−3.00
163.96
61.84

−3.91
42.85
473.37

−4.98
985.87
211.54

25th Pct.

50th Pct.

75th Pct.

Std. Dev.

−2.69
63.60
25.71

−3.57
7.44
472.73

−4.88
147.47
197.27

−4.07
29.09
10.83

−4.93
2.41
350.00

−6.46
46.22
132.30

−1.63
144.44
85.42

−2.62
23.29
586.25

−3.47
572.50
275.00

1.79
874.39
76.63

1.78
266.77
124.20

1.99
3227.84
114.98

overall result. The instrument for mortgages follows that of deposits.
For commercial loans, we use the same instrument constructed at the
bank-state-year level instead of the bank-county-year level, where the
state is determined by the location of the borrower’s headquarters.

One concern for our identification could be that the effect of disas-
ters spills over to affect local demand in unaffected counties. To this
end, notice that our exclusion restriction does not require the absence
of spillover effects altogether. It only requires that any potential in-
fluence of natural disasters on unobserved deposit characteristics in
unaffected areas is not correlated with banks’ branch networks. For
each bank, we include the log property damage interacted with its share
of branches to control for heterogeneous effects of disaster losses on
demand. Another concern could be that loan losses from the disaster
itself directly influence interest rates. To this end, we also include
banks’ loan loss provision as control variable in all specifications.
Finally, for the deposit demand system, we control for the lagged ratio
of insured deposits and limit the sample to observations with above-
median natural disaster exposure because of the stickiness of deposit
volumes.10

Next, to estimate the sensitivity of total deposit quantities to
changes in the overall desirability of deposits as in Eq. (16), we average
our market-bank-time level instrument, 𝑧𝐷,𝑚𝑛𝑡, at the market-year level
to construct

𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑡 =

1
𝑁𝑛𝑡

∑

𝑚

𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡.

(17)

This instrument captures how exposed a region is to indirect rate
changes coming through internal capital markets. We provide formal
conditions in Appendix A.2.5 under which our market-level instru-
ment’s exclusion restriction is valid. Our key identifying assumption
is that disasters only have a direct influence on consumer demand
in the county where they occur. That is, after conditioning on the
disaster damage in a local county, the demand shocks in a county
cannot be predicted by conditioning on disaster shocks elsewhere. The
corresponding instrument for mortgages is constructed in the same
way.

3.3. Estimation results

Table 2 reports the first-stage and second-stage results for estimating

the price disutility parameter 𝛼 for deposits, mortgages, and loans.

10 The stock of deposit volumes is extremely sticky so it is difficult to
differentiate the response in deposit volumes to small disaster shocks from
small fluctuations in deposit volumes that occur at the same time. This results
in noisy estimates if observations with small disaster exposures are used.
The underlying assumption is that bank branches exposed to above-median
disasters are representative of the full sample in terms of their deposit demand
elasticity. We note that the same issue applies much less to mortgage and loan
markets because the data for the issuance of mortgages and of loans are much
more persistent than the stock of deposits.

The price disutility parameters reported in the first row of panel
(b) of Table 2 are positive for deposits and negative for mortgages and
loans. Intuitively, deposit rates are paid by the bank so that raising
deposit rate increases a bank’s market share. In contrast, mortgage, and
loan rates are paid by borrowers, so a bank can improve its market
share by offering lower mortgage and loan rates. Quantitatively, the
coefficients imply that when a bank raises its deposit rate in one
county by 10 basis points, its share of total deposits will increase by
15.1%. When the same bank lowers its mortgage and loan rates in
one market by 10 basis points, its mortgage and loan shares increase
by 53.4% and 31.0%, respectively. The price disutility of deposits is
smaller in magnitude than that for mortgages and loans, consistent with
depositors being less attentive to interest rates than firm and mortgage
borrowers.

Regarding the outside option, we estimate the sensitivity of market-

level quantities 𝑄𝑃 ,𝑛𝑡 to the market-level desirability parameter 𝜓 𝑜
𝑃 ,𝑛𝑡
as in Eq. (16) for deposits and mortgages. We include the average
age, average income, the share of residents with a college degree, log
population, growth of house prices, and log local property damage due
to natural disasters.

Panel (b) in Table 3 reports the sensitivity of market-level quantities
𝑄𝑃 ,𝑛𝑡 to the market-level desirability parameter 𝜓 𝑜
𝑃 ,𝑛𝑡 to be 0.05 for
deposits and 0.05 for mortgages. Hence, as we show in Eq. (A.33),
the increase in deposit quantity when all banks in a county raise their
deposit rates by 10 basis points is given by

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑡

=

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡

𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑡

= 0.05 × 15.1% = 0.8%.

Similarly, when all banks in a county lower their mortgage rates by
10 basis points, the mortgage quantity increases by 0.05 × 53.4% =
2.7%. While our estimate of 𝛽𝐷,0 is statistically imprecise, we show in
our counterfactual analysis that increasing the estimate by a standard
deviation of .06 has a modest impact on how much reserve injections
crowd out lending.

For loans, our estimate of the quantity of firms choosing the outside
option uses the fact that we can observe both firms that do and do not
borrow. We count the number of firms in the Dealscan database that
did not borrow in a given year and state and the divide the number
by four, which reflects the average loan maturity. We then multiply
this number of firms times the average size of a loan in its market. The
average loan size is linearly projected from the existing loans in that
year with state fixed effect to account for state-level heterogeneity in
the size of loans. The underlying assumption is that potential borrowers
would have on average obtained a loan of the same size as the existing
ones in the market that year.

We report the outside option size for firms at the state-year level
in the Online Appendix OA1. In 2007, for example, the outside option
size is equivalent to a 𝛽𝑜 of 0.35. This means that when all banks in
a state lower their loan rates by 10 basis points, the loan quantity
increases by 0.35 × 31.0% = 10.9%. Notice that the demand elasticity
of loans is higher than that of mortgages because although their price

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038877W. Diamond et al.

Table 2
Demand system estimates.
This table reports the two-stage least squares results for estimating price disutility of deposit, mortgage, and loan demand
systems:

𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = 𝑎𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + 𝛾𝐷𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛾𝐷 + 𝑒𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡,
log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = 𝜒𝑛𝑡 + 𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝜀𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡.
These regressions are run at the market-bank-year level. Loan loss provision is the ratio of loan loss provision over total loans,
lag insured deposit ratio is the ratio of insured deposits over total liabilities lagged by 1 year, and log property damage is
the county-level loss from natural disasters times the bank’s branch number share in that county. For the deposit, mortgage
and loan rates, 0.01 means 1%. The sample period is from 2001 to 2017. We report standard errors clustered by bank in the
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (a): First Stage panel regression

(1)
Deposit rate

(2)
Mortgage rate

IV

Loan Loss Provision

Lag Insured Deposit Ratio

Log Property Damage

R2
Adj. R2
Num. of Obs.
Market-Year F.E.

Panel (b): 2SLS Panel regression

1.69∗∗∗
(0.26)
0.01∗∗∗
(0.00)
0.00∗∗∗
(0.00)
−0.00∗∗∗
(0.00)

0.87
0.80
105551
Y

12.17∗∗∗
(2.90)
−0.02
(0.01)

−0.00∗∗
(0.00)

0.91
0.85
75470
Y

(3)
Loan rate

3.18∗∗∗
(0.57)
0.05∗
(0.03)

0.29
0.27
23393
Y

(1)
Deposit market share

(2)
Mortgage market share

(3)
Loan market share

Rate (with IV)

Loan Loss Provision

Lag Insured Deposit Ratio

Log Property Damage

Num. of Obs.
Market-Year F.E.

151.32∗∗∗
(49.07)
−1.41
(1.26)
−1.97∗∗∗
(0.18)
1.26∗∗∗
(0.02)

105551
Y

−533.93∗∗∗
(167.24)
−14.53
(9.98)

0.81∗∗∗
(0.07)

75470
Y

−310.37∗∗∗
(89.25)
19.56
(12.27)

23393
Y

Table 3
Outside option estimates (Deposits and Mortgages).
This table reports two-stage least squares results for estimating the sensitivity of market-level quantities to the aggregate observed desirability parameter 𝜓 𝑜
𝑛𝑡:

𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝜌𝐷,𝑡 + 𝜌𝐷,𝑛 + 𝜃𝐷𝑧𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + 𝜒𝐷,𝑛𝑡𝜃𝐷 + 𝜀𝑜
log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝛼𝐷,𝑡 + 𝛼𝐷,𝑛 + 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡,

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + 𝜒𝐷,𝑛𝑡𝜌𝐷 + 𝜂𝐷,𝑛𝑡.
The regression is run at the market-year level. We include market-year level controls, including average age and income of the population, fraction of residents
college degree, log population, annual house price growth, and log property losses due to natural disasters. For the aggregate desirability of deposits and mortgages,
0.01 means 1%. The sample period is 2001–2017. We report standard errors clustered by county in the parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (a): First Stage

IV

R2
Adj. R2
Within Adj. R2
Num. of Obs.
Controls
Year F.E.
County F.E.

(1)
Deposit 𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡

0.02∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.99
0.99
0.98
43255
Y
Y
Y

(2)
Mortgage 𝜓 𝑜

𝑀,𝑛𝑡

−0.45∗∗∗
(0.13)

0.94
0.94
0.72
22447
Y
Y
Y

Panel (b): 2SLS

𝜓 𝑜 (with IV)

Num. of Obs.
Controls
Year F.E.
County F.E.

(1)
Deposit quantity

(2)
Mortgage quantity

0.05
(0.06)

43255
Y
Y
Y

0.05
(0.03)

22447
Y
Y
Y

disutility parameters are of similar magnitudes, the outside option of
loans responds much more to changes in observed desirability than
in the case of mortgages. One reason could be that borrowers in the
syndicated loan market have more flexibility to borrow from other
sources such as the bond market. Although our focus is on bank lending
to firms, our framework could be extended to account for a potential
substitution from loans to bonds with public firm-level data on bond
financing. Deposits have a low sensitivity along both dimensions, which
leads to a highly inelastic deposit demand curve.

Because our result that the reserves created by QE crowd out loans
relies on our estimate of the elasticity of loan demand, we present an
alternative estimation approach in Online Appendix C. This approach
to estimating firms’ demand for loans exploits the fact that firms
tend to borrow persistently from the same bank multiple times, even
though they have the option of borrowing from a new bank. Because
of this persistence, we can identify firms’ elasticity of credit demand by
observing how much they decrease their total borrowing when there is
a negative credit supply shock to a bank from which they have already

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038878W. Diamond et al.

borrowed. We find similar results to our benchmark estimates, as we
discuss in Online Appendix C.

4. Cost function

This section specifies and estimates the bank’s cost function for
producing deposits, mortgages, and loans. Quantifying the cost function
is challenging because banks choose all their balance sheet components
simultaneously. We propose a specification of how banks’ costs depend
on their balance sheet components that can be feasibly estimated using
multiple instrumental variables. In our novel estimation method, we
first perform a reduced form analysis of how banks’ marginal costs
and balance sheet quantities respond to exogenous shocks. Next, we
estimate the bank’s cost function by choosing its parameters to replicate
these reduced form results. This estimated cost function tells us how a
bank’s marginal costs are impacted when the supply of reserves in the
banking system changes.

We first set up the cost function in Section 4.1 and then explain
how we estimate it in Section 4.2. Section 4.3 describes the data and
instruments we use and Section 4.4 reports our estimation results.

4.1. Cost function specification

Let ⃗𝑄 = (𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡)′ denote the vector of bank 𝑚’s total
deposit, lending, and security quantities at time 𝑡.11 Here, 𝑄𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡 =
𝑄𝐿,𝑚𝑡+𝑄𝑀,𝑚𝑡 is the sum of a bank’s per-branch corporate loan and mort-
gage holdings. We specify the bank’s cost function with the quadratic
expression

𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡) = ⃗𝑄′𝐻 ⃗𝑄 +

∑

𝑛∗

𝑄𝐿∗,𝑛∗𝑚𝑡𝜀𝐿∗

𝑛∗𝑚𝑡 +

∑

𝑛

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝜀𝐷

𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡𝜀𝑆
𝑚𝑡.

(18)

Here, 𝑛∗ is a variable that indexes all lending markets, either mort-
gage or corporate loan, allowing for more compact notation. 𝐻 is a
symmetric matrix that is the Hessian of our cost function

𝐻 =

𝐻𝐷𝐷 𝐻𝐷𝐿∗ 𝐻𝐷𝑆
𝐻𝐷𝐿∗ 𝐻𝐿∗𝐿∗ 𝐻𝐿∗𝑆
𝐻𝐷𝑆 𝐻𝐿∗𝑆 𝐻𝑆𝑆

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

.

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

(19)

The cost function depends linearly on each bank-market-level quantity
and quadratically on the bank-level quantities. This quadratic specifica-
tion yields the following linear expressions for a bank’s cost of changing
its deposit, lending, and security quantities

𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐿∗,𝑛∗𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

= 𝐻𝐷𝐷𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡 + 𝐻𝐷𝐿∗ 𝑄𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡 + 𝐻𝐷𝑆 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡 + 𝜀𝐷

𝑛𝑚𝑡,

= 𝐻𝐷𝐿∗ 𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡 + 𝐻𝐿∗𝐿∗ 𝑄𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡 + 𝐻𝐿∗𝑆 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡 + 𝜀𝐿∗

𝑛∗𝑚𝑡,

= 𝐻𝐷𝑆 𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡 + 𝐻𝐿∗𝑆 𝑄𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡 + 𝐻𝑆𝑆 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡 + 𝜀𝑆
𝑚𝑡.

(20)

(21)

(22)

Our specification allows for flexible interactions between a bank’s
costs of borrowing, lending, and holding securities. In particular, a
bank’s holding of securities affects its marginal cost of lending and
deposit-taking. An injection of reserves can therefore cause banks to
adjust their loan and deposit quantities. The magnitudes of 𝐻𝐿∗𝑆 and
𝐻𝐷𝑆 play a particularly crucial role for determining the impact of
reserve injections. As shown in Eqs. (6) to (8), the response of our
model to external shocks such as an increase in reserve supply depends
only on the second derivatives of the bank’s cost function reflected in
the matrix 𝐻.

Our key simplifying assumption is that mortgages and corporate
loan quantities can be aggregated into a single term 𝑄𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡 = 𝑄𝑀,𝑚𝑡 +

11 We normalize these variables by divided by the number of branches where
a bank has deposits. This normalization increases the power of our estimates
by reducing the weight on a few very large banks.

𝑄𝐿,𝑚𝑡 that appears in the bank’s cost function. This follows the simple
model of Bernanke and Blinder (1988) that summarizes a bank’s bal-
ance sheet by the 3 main categories of liquid securities, illiquid loans,
and deposit liabilities. Within this framework, we are able to capture
the key feature of banks that they provide deposits and loans together.
= 𝐻𝐷𝐿∗ would explain why it is
A negative cross partial
optimal for banks to jointly provide deposits and loans rather than for
each to be provided by a separate firm, which is a key stylized fact
about banks. Pragmatically, this reduction of the bank’s balance sheet
to 3 quantities rather than 4 also makes our model simple enough to
estimate using 3 distinct sources of exogenous variations as we explain
below.

𝜕𝐶2(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡𝜕𝑄𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡

4.2. Estimation strategy

To estimate the bank’s cost function Hessian 𝐻, we first infer each
bank’s marginal costs of providing deposits, mortgages, and loans using
our estimated demand systems. We use the first-order conditions for
a bank’s profit-maximizing choices of interest rates, Eqs. (2) to (4).
We provide an explicit expression for the bank’s marginal costs in
Eqs. (A.40)–(A.42) in Appendix A.3. Finally, we can use Eq. (5) to
infer a bank’s marginal cost of holding securities directly from observed
interest rates because the securities market is competitive.

We then observe how a bank’s marginal costs and balance sheet
quantities respond to an instrument 𝑧𝑖
𝑚𝑡. Such an instrument is neces-
sary because a bank’s chosen quantities are likely to be correlated with
the cost shocks 𝜀 that it faces. For example, a bank will likely choose
to provide more deposits if it becomes cheaper for the bank to do so.
Looking at the covariance between a bank’s marginal cost changes and
quantity changes will therefore reflect how a bank responds to cost
shocks and not allow us to identify the Hessian 𝐻. Instead, if we see
how marginal costs and quantities respond to an instrument 𝑧𝑖
𝑚𝑡 that is
uncorrelated with unobserved cost shocks, we can use this information
to consistently estimate 𝐻.

We regress all of the bank’s observed marginal costs and bank-level
quantities on this instrument. For 𝐴 ∈ {𝐷, 𝐿∗, 𝑆} let 𝑀𝐶 𝐴
𝑚𝑡 be bank 𝑚’s
marginal cost of adding additional units of A to its balance sheet. The
impact of our instrument on the bank’s marginal cost is given by the
linear regression

𝑀𝐶 𝐴

𝑚𝑡 = 𝜃𝑖,𝐴

𝑚𝑡 + 𝑢𝐴
𝑚𝑡.

𝑡 + 𝜅𝑖,𝐴𝑧𝑖
We include the fixed effect 𝜃𝑖,𝐴
to capture time-series variation in banks’
costs that is not directly caused by decisions they make. The impact of
the instrument on quantities is given by

(23)

𝑡

𝑚𝑡 + 𝜀𝐴
𝑚𝑡.

𝑡 + 𝛾 𝑖,𝐴𝑧𝑖

𝑚𝑡 is uncorrelated with 𝑢𝐴

𝑄𝐴,𝑚𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖,𝐴
Our identifying assumption is that 𝑧𝑖
𝑚𝑡 and 𝜀𝐴
𝑚𝑡.
From these regressions, we obtain estimates 𝛾 𝑖,𝐷, 𝛾 𝑖,𝐿∗, and 𝛾 𝑖,𝑆 of how
deposit, loan, and security quantities respond to a one unit increase
in the instrument. We obtain similar estimates 𝜅𝑖,𝐷 and 𝜅𝑖,𝐿∗ of how a
bank’s deposit and loan marginal costs respond to the instrument. We
must have that 𝜅𝑖,𝑆 = 0 because all banks have the same marginal cost
of holding reserves in a perfectly competitive reserve market.

(24)

Given these regressions, our instrument 𝑧𝑖

𝑚𝑡 imposes the following

equations that the cost function Hessian H must satisfy

(25)

0 = 𝐻𝑆𝐷𝛾 𝑖,𝐷 + 𝐻𝑆𝐿∗ 𝛾 𝑖,𝐿∗ + 𝐻𝑆𝑆 𝛾 𝑖,𝑆
𝜅𝑖,𝐿∗ = 𝐻𝐿∗𝐷𝛾 𝑖,𝐷 + 𝐻𝐿∗𝐿∗ 𝛾 𝑖,𝐿∗ + 𝐻𝐿∗𝑆 𝛾 𝑖,𝑆
𝜅𝑖,𝐷 = 𝐻𝐷𝐷𝛾 𝑖,𝐷 + 𝐻𝐷𝐿∗ 𝛾 𝑖,𝐿∗
+ 𝐻𝐷𝑆 𝛾 𝑖,𝑆 .
A one unit increase in the instrument 𝑧𝑖
𝑚𝑡 causes a 𝛾 𝑖,𝐷 increase in de-
posits, 𝛾 𝑖,𝐿∗ increase in loans, and a 𝛾 𝑖,𝑆 increase in security quantities.
These changes in the bank’s balance sheet quantities cause a change
𝜅𝑖,𝐿∗ in the marginal cost of loans, 𝜅𝑖,𝐷 change in the marginal cost
of deposits, and 0 change in the marginal cost of holding securities.

(27)

(26)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038879W. Diamond et al.

As a result, we have three linear equations that provide information
about what the cost function Hessian H must be. In Section 4.3, we
present two distinct instruments 𝑧𝑖
𝑚𝑡 (𝑖 = 1, 2) that yields six equations.
In addition, we also present a separate high-frequency identification
approach to estimating the coefficient 𝐻𝑆𝑆 .

Once we have 𝐻𝑆𝑆 estimated, we use Eq. (25) for both instruments
to solve for the two unknowns 𝐻𝑆𝐷 and 𝐻𝑆𝐿∗ with two equations. Note
that the Hessian’s symmetry solves a crucial identification challenge for
analyzing the reserve supply channel of QE. We are able to identify
𝐻𝑆𝐷 and 𝐻𝑆𝐿∗ from Eq. (25) because we can infer how the marginal
cost of holding reserves responds to changes in deposit and loan quanti-
ties. The Hessian’s symmetry allows us to conclude that 𝐻𝑆𝐷 and 𝐻𝑆𝐿∗
also are respectively equal to the impact of a change in the quantity of
reserves on deposit and loan marginal costs. As a result, we are able
to learn about the impact of QE’s injection of reserves on deposit and
loan markets without exogenous variation in reserve supply.

To estimate the remaining parameters 𝐻𝐿∗𝐿∗ , 𝐻𝐿∗𝐷, 𝐻𝐷𝐷, we first
we solve Eq. (26) from our two instruments for the parameters
𝐻𝐿∗𝐿∗ , 𝐻𝐿∗𝐷 with two equations and two unknowns. Finally, from
Eq. (27), we have two equations show how the two instruments impact
the marginal cost of deposit holdings. There is only one unknown 𝐻𝐷𝐷
and two equations corresponding to the two instruments so we solve
for 𝐻𝐷𝐷 by minimizing the sum of the squared errors in these two
equations.12

4.3. Data and instruments

Marginal Costs As explained in Section 4.2, we infer the marginal
costs for mortgages, deposits, and loans using our demand system
estimates in Section 3.3. We then average these estimated marginal
costs to the bank-year level.

Deposits, Loans, Mortgages, and Securities We obtain bank-level
quantities from Call Reports, which allows us to keep track of the
volume of deposits, loans, mortgages, and securities that are actually
retained on bank balance sheets. We measure mortgages with the Call
Reports’ residential loan variable, and commercial loans make up the
remainder of loans from Call Reports. We further include bank-level
securities from Call Reports, which is the sum of cash, reserves, Fed
funds, repos, Treasury securities, and agency securities. Finally, we
normalize all bank-level volume variables by the number of branches
where each bank has deposits. This normalization prevents our esti-
mates from being driven by a few banks with a very large amount
deposits and loans.

Instruments We use two instrumental variables, 𝑧1

𝑚𝑡 to identify
the cost function parameters. These shocks need to be at the bank-level
and must be independent of banks’ cost shocks in the cross-section.
In addition, we separately use exogenous daily variation in the total
supply of reserves to identify the parameter 𝐻𝑆𝑆 .

𝑚𝑡, 𝑧2

Our first instrument is simply the natural disaster losses that a
bank’s branches are directly exposed to. Unlike in the instrument for
demand systems, we are no longer in need of a branch-level supply
shock. Rather, disaster losses to an area increase the need to rebuild
and repair local infrastructure and housing, which directly comprise a
bank-level demand shock for bank lending. These disaster losses are
also plausibly unrelated to shocks to banks’ marginal costs in the cross-
section. Hence, we construct the instrument by adding up the disaster

12 This lack of an exact solution is because both the impact of deposit
quantities on loan costs and the impact of loan quantities on deposit costs
tell us about 𝐻𝐷𝐿∗ . Our use of two instruments therefore results in an
overidentifying restriction for this parameter. Our choice to make 𝐻𝐷𝐷 the
parameter that does not exactly solve an equation is because deposit demand
is the least elastic, so the value of 𝐻𝐷𝐷 matters the least for our counterfactual
of interest.

losses that each bank is exposed to through its branches. Specifically,
for bank 𝑚 at time 𝑡, we have
(

)

𝑧1
𝑚𝑡 =

1
𝑁𝑚𝑡

log

∑

𝑛

𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 ⋅

𝑁 𝐵
𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑛′ 𝑁 𝐵

𝑛′𝑚𝑡

∑

,

∑

𝑁 𝐵
𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑛′ 𝑁 𝐵 _𝑛′𝑚𝑡

𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 ⋅

where ∑
is the sum of disaster losses accrued to
branches of bank 𝑚 in county 𝑛, and 𝑁𝑚𝑡 is the number of counties in
which bank 𝑚 has branches. We mathematically show in Appendix E
that for a firm that sells a good in several markets, a demand shock in
one market can be used to estimate the firm’s marginal cost curve.

Our second instrument is a Bartik deposit instrument. Follow-
ing Bartik (1991), we construct our instrument based on the average
growth rates of deposits in markets where banks have branches. In-
tuitively, we make use of the fact that counties experience different
rates of deposit growth and that banks operate branches in different
counties to construct our Bartik deposit instrument. The identifying
assumption is that the deposit growth rates in different counties that a
bank is exposed to arise from county-level economic conditions rather
than shocks to the bank’s cost of supplying deposits, mortgages, and
loans. Specifically, for bank 𝑚 in year 𝑡, we have

𝑧2
𝑚𝑡 =

(

∑

𝑛

1
𝑁𝑚𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 − 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡−1
𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡−1

)

,

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡−𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡−1
𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡−1

where
𝑁𝑚𝑡 is the number of counties in which the bank has branches.

is the deposit market growth rate in county 𝑛 and

While the Bartik instrument should primarily serve as a shock to
deposit demand, and the natural disaster instrument primarily as a
shock to loan demand, we do not require either to affect deposit or loan
demand alone. The exclusion restriction holds even if the instruments
affect the demand more than one bank balance sheet component as
long. We only assume that each instrument is uncorrelated with the 𝜀
marginal cost shocks. The only additional requirement for identifying
our parameters is that the two instruments are not perfectly collinear,
which we show is satisfied in the data.

Finally, we use daily shocks to the Treasury General Account (TGA)
to estimate the effect of reserve supply shocks on the marginal cost
of securities. The TGA contains cash balances that the U.S. Treasury
holds at the Federal Reserve. Since reserves are held either through
the TGA or the banking system, a positive shock to the TGA balance
corresponds to an equivalent negative shock to the reserves available
for the banking system for a given total reserve supply. As also noted
by Correa et al. (2020) and Bräuning (2017), these daily changes in
the TGA balance are a result of the Treasury’s day-to-day business
operations that are arguably unrelated to QE and market conditions.
Following Bräuning (2017), we include indicator variables for the start
and end days of each month and quarter because these periods coincide
with both Treasury payment days, which would affect the TGA balance,
and changes in banks’ regulatory reporting days, which would affect
banks’ marginal costs. We further control for changes in the volume of
the Reverse Repo (RRP) Facility, 𝛥𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑡, which is effectively the uptake
of reserves by money market funds, as well as the weekly change in
total reserves 𝛥𝑇 𝑆𝑌𝑤.13 We use these variables to predict changes in
the spread between the interest rate on excess reserves (IOER) and the
federal funds rate (FFR), 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡. This spread measures how
much higher of a yield is available to banks that can hold reserves than
to other non-bank investors. Specifically, we estimate

𝛥𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑇 𝐺𝐴𝑡 + 𝛾𝛥𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑡 + 𝜃𝛥𝑇 𝑆𝑌𝑤 + Fixed Effects + 𝜖𝑡,
(28)

13 Total reserves are only available the weekly level.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388710W. Diamond et al.

Table 4
Cost function regression estimates.
This table reports the sensitivity of bank-level costs and quantities to losses from natural disasters and a Bartik deposit shock as in Eqs. (23)
and (24). Sheldus Instrument refers to property losses due to natural disasters as explained in Section 4.3. Bartik Deposit Instrument refers to
a Bartik-style instrument of deposit growth as explained in Section 4.3. Rates are in basis points and quantities are in millions. The sample
period is from 2001 to 2017. We report standard errors clustered by bank in the parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (a): Results using natural disaster instrument

Deposit cost
(1)

Mtg/Loan cost
(2)

Deposit Vol
(3)

Mtg/Loan Vol
(4)

Security Vol
(5)

Sheldus Instrument

Loan Loss Provision

R2
Adj. R2
Num. of Obs.

−3.17∗∗∗
(0.32)

−5.96∗
(3.26)

0.59
0.59
53651

Panel (b): Results using Bartik deposit shock

2.46∗∗∗
(0.92)

1.91
(1.34)

0.82
0.82
12733

Deposit cost
(1)

Mtg/Loan cost
(2)

Bartik Instrument

Loan Loss Provision

R2
Adj. R2
Num. of Obs.

30.98∗∗∗
(7.96)

−4.67
(3.28)

0.44
0.44
50091

−24.57∗
(14.85)

−7.80∗∗
(3.47)

0.82
0.82
12093

28.31∗∗∗
(8.11)

6.98
(7.79)

0.00
0.00
118942

Deposit Vol
(3)

1048.26∗∗
(417.94)

7.19
(48.79)

0.00
0.00
62352

26.37∗∗∗
(6.25)

527.36∗∗∗
(202.27)

0.01
0.01
119236

Mtg/Loan Vol
(4)

474.34∗∗∗
(136.09)

153.96
(93.89)

0.01
0.00
62458

18.97∗∗
(8.12)

1.51
(2.40)

0.00
0.00
118923

Security Vol
(5)

1084.52∗∗
(508.92)

−48.37
(48.10)

0.00
0.00
62346

Table 5
TGA regression estimates.
This table reports the results from the TGA regression
(28). Rates are in basis points and quantities are in
trillions. The sample period is from 2001 to 2017. *, **,
and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Change in TGA Balance

Change in RRP

Change in Fed Sum

R2
Adj. R2
Num. of Obs.

−7.88∗∗∗
(1.82)

0.03∗∗∗
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.46
0.46
1770

where Fixed Effects include indicator variables that equal to one the
first and last days of each month and quarter. The coefficient 𝛽 tells us
how a shock to the total reserve supply impacts the IOER-FFR spread.

4.4. Estimation results

Table 4 reports the coefficients from regressing marginal costs and
bank-level quantities on each of the two instruments, i.e., (𝜅𝑖,𝐷, 𝜅𝑖,𝐿∗ ,
𝛾 𝑖,𝐷, 𝛾 𝑖,𝐿∗ , 𝛾 𝑖,𝑆 ). Since these parameters are instrument-specific, we re-
port the parameter values corresponding to the bank-level natural
disaster shock in Panel (a) and the parameter values corresponding to
the bank-level Bartik deposit shock in Panel (b). We report additional
summary statistics about the marginal costs using in estimation in
online Appendix F.

According to Panel (a), banks with branches in areas with larger nat-
ural disaster losses increase the volume of deposits, loans, and securities
on their balance sheets. At the same time, mortgage and loans become
more costly to provide while deposits become less costly to provide
for these banks. Taken together, we infer that the increase in volumes
is consistent with an increase in loan and mortgage demand following
natural disasters. From Panel (b), banks experiencing a positive Bartik
deposit shock also increase their deposits, loans, and securities. Deposit

costs become less negative, implying that deposits become more costly
to provide. At the same time, the costs of lending to firms and issuing
mortgage loans declines as deposits become more abundant. Hence, the
increase in balance sheet size in this case is aligned with a positive
deposit demand shock, as expected from the Bartik deposit instrument.
Table 5 reports the results from the TGA regression. We obtain a
point estimate of −7.88, which implies that a 1 trillion dollar increase
in the TGA balance is associated with a 7.88 bps movement in the
reserve spread. If these reserves were injected and the reserve market
allowed to clear holding other quantities fixed, they would be allocated
proportionately across the bank branches in our sample. If we allocate
these reserve assets equally to the 65,569 bank branches that exist in
2007 (the year before our counterfactual exercise), we get 0.51 bps
change in the reserve spread per 1 million dollar increase in each
branch’s security holdings. This implies 𝐻𝑆𝑆 = 0.51.

Based on these coefficient estimates, we solve for the cost function’s
Hessian 𝐻 and present the results in Table 6. First, notice that all
diagonal terms are positive, which means that increased quantities of
deposits, loans, or securities respectively increase the marginal cost of
providing additional deposits, loans, or securities. Regarding the off-
diagonal terms, the marginal costs of loans and securities decrease
when deposit quantities increase. In other words, there are cost syn-
ergies between banks’ deposit-taking and lending that support the joint
provision of deposits and loans by the same institution. However,
the marginal cost of lending is increasing in securities holdings. This
implies that injecting additional reserves that banks must hold makes it
not cheaper but more costly to provide corporate loans and mortgages.
This increase in the marginal cost of lending is a crucial reason why we
find that reserve injections crowd out lending in our counterfactual.

The coefficients imply that a $100 million increase in reserves for
each bank branch would increase the marginal cost for mortgages
and corporate loans by 100 × 0.39 = 39 bps. At the same time, the
marginal cost of deposits decreases by 100 × 0.70 = 70 bps. To put
these numbers in context, if $1 trillion in reserves were injected and
equally distributed across bank branches in 2007, each bank branch
would receive $15.25 million in reserves, which would increase the
marginal costs of mortgages and corporate loans by 5.9 bps. Of course,
this change in marginal costs does not describe the equilibrium impact
of a reserve injection, since banks can adjust their deposit and loan

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388711W. Diamond et al.

Table 6
Implied Hessian.
This table reports the implied Hessian matrix 𝐻 based on the cost
function estimates. Please refer to Section 4 for a detailed description
of the estimation. The Hessian matrix reports the impact of an extra $1
million dollars per branch of a balance sheet quantity on the number
of basis points by which a bank’s marginal cost changes.

𝑄𝐷
𝑄𝑀𝐿
𝑄𝑆

𝜕𝐶
𝜕𝑄𝐷

1.06
−0.66
−0.70

𝜕𝐶
𝜕𝑄𝐿∗

−0.66
0.53
0.39

𝜕𝐶
𝜕𝑄𝑆

−0.70
0.39
0.51

quantities in response. The equilibrium effect of a reserve injection
therefore depends on both the supply and demand sides of our model.
To quantify the equilibrium impact of reserve injections in the banking
system, we present a counterfactual analysis using both our estimated
cost function and demand systems in the next section.

5. Counterfactual exercise

We use our estimated model to compute the effect of an increase
in the supply of central bank reserves, as was caused by the Federal
Reserve’s QE Programs. These reserves are safe, liquid assets that must
only be held by banks, so this increased supply forces banks to hold
a larger portfolio of safe assets. While QE is an exchange between
Treasuries and reserves, commercial banks only hold a very small
proportion of Treasuries on bank balance sheets. Thus, the reserve
injection comprises a net increase in banks’ liquid asset holdings in our
counterfactual.

The impact of this increased reserve supply has two main effects.
First, an increase in reserve holdings changes banks’ marginal cost of
providing deposits, mortgages, and loans. This change in marginal cost
is quantified by our estimated cost function in Eq. (18). Second, because
of these cost changes, banks change the interest rates they choose to for
deposits, loans, and mortgages. Given our estimated demand systems,
we can compute how the equilibrium quantities of deposits, loans, and
mortgages respond to these changes in the rates that banks choose. As a
result, our model tells us how an increase in the supply of central bank
reserves passes through to changes in both interest rates and quantities
of deposits, mortgages, and loans provided by the banking system.

We note that our results focus on the effect of reserve injection
on the banking system, which is an integral part of QE. Our results
complement other transmission channels of QE that have been analyzed
in the literature.14 These transmission channels primarily depend on
the effect of asset purchases, while our work is novel in that we zoom
in on the effect of reserves that the central bank uses to finance asset
purchases.

5.1. Computational strategy

To compute our counterfactual, we need to determine each bank’s
holdings of reserves as well as the quantity and interest rate each bank
charges for loans, deposits, and mortgages in each market after an
injection in reserves. Formally, we need to compute an equilibrium
set of interest rates and quantities that solve the bank’s first order
conditions in Eqs. (2)–(5) with an increased supply of reserves. This is
an over 38,000-dimensional problem, since we need to solve for interest
rates for mortgages, deposits, and loans at every branch of every bank.
Nevertheless, we can reduce the dimensionality considerably, and the
model is tractable to solve. We define a function in (OA47) of the
Appendix that maps the set of bank-level deposit, mortgage, and loan

14 For example, Gagnon et al. (2010), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2011), Christensen and Krogstrup (2019), Rodnyansky and Darmouni (2017),
Chakraborty et al. (2020), as discussed in our literature review.

quantities to itself whose fixed point yields the equilibrium of our
model.

𝐷,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑖

𝑀,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑖

𝐿,𝑚𝑡, and 𝑄𝑖

We posit an increase 𝑅 in the interest paid on securities above the
yield earned in the data. We then compute the quantity of reserves the
central bank must add to the financial system to attain this interest rate
increase. Let 𝑄𝑖
𝑆,𝑚𝑡, where 𝑖 stands for initial, be
the bank level quantities of deposits, mortgages, loans, and securities
observed in the data. First, we start with a hypothesized vector of
bank-level quantities 𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑀,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝐿,𝑚𝑡. Second, for each bank, we
compute a security quantity 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡 so that the bank’s marginal cost of
holding securities is consistent with the rise 𝑅 in the yield on securities.
Third, given the vector of bank-level quantities 𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑀,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝐿,𝑚𝑡,
𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡, we use our estimated cost function to compute a bank’s marginal
cost of holding deposits, mortgages, loans, and securities. Fourth, we
compute the optimal interest rates banks choose that are jointly con-
sistent with all of their marginal costs. Fifth, given the rates chosen in
each market, we compute the bank-market-level quantities demanded
by depositors/borrowers. Finally, we sum up the bank-market level
quantities from the previous step and compute the difference from the
hypothesized bank-level quantities 𝑄𝐷,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑀,𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝐿,𝑚𝑡. The market is in
equilibrium when this difference is 0. Please refer to Appendix G for
further details.

5.2. Counterfactual results: The reserve supply channel of QE

We conduct a year-by-year counterfactual with the amount of re-
serves supplied by QE in each year from 2008 to 2017. On average,
this amounted to a reserve supply increase of $1.83 trillion per year.
We note that the number of banks present in each year varies, as
shown in Online Appendix H. This variation arises mostly due to the
improving sample coverage of the mortgage volume data from HMDA.
These changes in data coverage should not affect our results if the banks
in our sample are representative of those in the true population.

The average changes in interest rates and quantities that resulted
are shown in Table 7. From the table, we observe that the interest rate
paid on reserves increases by an average of 11.55 bps. The increase in
reserve yields are passed through to the interest rates on deposits, mort-
gages, and loans by 15.56 bps, 8.38 bps, and 7.37 bps, respectively. In
terms of quantities, bank loans extended to firms respond the most with
an average decline of $134.2 billion. Mortgage and deposit volumes
respond by less with an average annual drop of $6.3 billion and an
annual increase of $80.9 billion, respectively. These results imply each
dollar of reserves crowds out 7.67 cents of total lending and crowds in
4.42 cents of deposits.15

We next zoom in on lending to firms, where the impact of the
reserve injection is largest. In Fig. 4 we show the volume of reserves
that were in the banking system each year and our estimated impact
on bank loan quantities. The volume of reserves injected from QE
increased from 2008 to 2014 and remained at elevated levels until
2017. The reduction in firm loans extended follows a very similar
trend, reaching a maximum annual volume of $216.0 billion in 2017.
Fig. 3 compares what banks’ syndicated loan issuance would have been
without the injection of reserves to what it was in the data. In the
data, historically low issuance levels in the 2008 crisis were followed
by a rapid recovery to all-time highs. This increase in lending would
have been even greater without the injection of reserves, where lending

15 In a sensitivity analysis, we re-ran our counterfactual adding one standard
deviation, 0.06, to the coefficient 𝛽𝐷,0 that determines how aggregate deposit
quantities respond to deposit rates. With this change, the total quantity of
lending crowded out per year falls modestly to $121.9 billion from $134.2
billion. This modest change is despite a greater increase in deposit quantities,
which increase by $169.4 billion. Hence, our result that reserve injections
crowd out lending remains robust.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388712W. Diamond et al.

Table 7
Counterfactual results: QE
This table reports the results of our counterfactual analysis that injects the actual amount of reserves QE supplied for each year from 2008 to
2017. We compute the effects on rates and quantities, and report the average across years.

Average change in rates (in basis points)

Average change in quantities (in Trn dollars)

Deposits

Mortgages

15.56

8.38

Loans

7.37

Securities

11.55

Deposits

Mortgages

Loans

Securities

0.0809

−0.0063

−0.1342

1.8323

Fig. 3. Observed and Counterfactual Lending Quantities.

Fig. 5. IOER-Fed Funds Spread and Model-Implied Reserve Spread.

between the model and data here is not mechanical or assumed in
our estimation. Our model is identified from the response of banks to
plausibly exogenous shocks, without using any data directly from the
implementation of QE. The results suggest that the positive IOER-FFR
spread observed after 2008 may not have occurred without QE.

In summary, our main finding is that reserves crowd out bank
lending to firms and that mortgage and deposit quantities respond by
less. A larger reserve supply reduces lending because holding reserves
raises the cost of providing loans, as our cost function estimates in
Table 6 show. While loan, mortgage, and deposit rates increase by
similar amounts, lending to firms is crowded out the most because
the aggregate elasticity of loan demand is higher than of mortgage
or deposit demand, as discussed in Section 3.3. On net, central bank
reserves take up balance sheet space to crowd out bank lending capacity
to the real economy. Therefore, our findings suggest that the increase
in reserve supply following QE may bring about a counterproductive
effect on the banking system.

Consistent with reserves taking up bank balance sheet space, we
show in an additional counterfactual that reserve holdings and lending
increase more at banks with less constrained balance sheets. This result
echoes Kandrac and Schlusche (2021), who find that both reserve
holdings and lending increased more at banks that were exempt from
an increase in FDIC deposit insurance fees for non-deposit funded assets
compared to non-exempt banks. In Online Appendix I, we simulate
a similar counterfactual and find similar results. This is because the
increased cost of non-deposit financing makes it more expensive both
for reserves and loans to be on a bank’s balance sheet, pushing both
quantities in the same direction. Our main counterfactual considers a
different scenario, where we exogenously inject reserves in the banking
system keeping the form of banks’ cost function fixed, which is why
we find that a larger reserve supply contracts rather than expands
aggregate bank lending.

Policy implications. While the focus of our model and estimation is on
quantifying the banking system’s response to an increase in reserve
supply, it has some qualitative policy implications. We propose two
ways to reduce the crowding out of loans: reducing banks’ cost of

Fig. 4. Reserve Supply and Reduction in Corporate Loan Issuance.

quantities would have been 14.1% higher in 2015, 12.4% higher in
2016, and 13.2% higher in 2017.

The model-implied reserve spread is quite similar to the observed
spread between IOER and the FFR in the data. The IOER is a risk-
free yield available only to banks, which is strictly above the FFR at
which other market participants can lend overnight to banks. We plot
both time series in Fig. 5. Adding the same volume of reserves as were
injected through QE leads to an 11.55 bps average increase in the
model-implied reserve spread from 2008 to 2017. This is extremely
close to the average spread between the IOER and the FFR during the
same period, 11.9 bps.16 Changes in our reserve spread also appear
to move in tandem with changes in the IOER-FFR spread over time,
with a correlation between the two series of 0.50. The close mapping

16 We calculate the IOER-FFR as the median spread in December of each
year because of year-end volatility in the federal funds market. We omit 2008
since bank credit risk could have impacted the FFR that year.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388713W. Diamond et al.

holding reserves and lowering the proportion of reserves trapped in the
banking sector.

To the extent that bank loans to firms are useful for stimulating
the economy, the reserve supply channel of QE may detract from
QE’s goal of providing stimulus. This crowding out of loans could be
reduced by lowering banks’ cost of holding reserves. One possibility
would be to relax the Supplementary Leverage Ratio. This regulation
constrains banks’ leverage ratios, which must increase when banks
finance addition reserve holdings with deposits or other forms of debt.
As a result, this regulation could induce banks to hold fewer loans
to offset their increased holding of reserves. Exempting reserves from
the calculation of the SLR as was temporarily implemented following
the Covid-19 crisis may be one way to reduce the crowding out of
bank lending. With that said, our cost function captures the overall
costs banks face and cannot say what is specifically due to the SLR.
Future work may examine bank balance sheets and specific regulatory
requirements at a more granular level.

An alternative way to reduce the crowding out of loans we docu-
ment is for the Federal Reserve to reduce the quantity of reserves that
QE forces banks to hold. In particular, the Federal Reserve could extend
reserve access to non-banks, which would reduce the pressure for the
banking system to absorb the entire reserve injection. One step in this
direction is the Reverse Repo (RRP) Facility that allows money market
funds to hold secured deposits with the Federal Reserve. Expanding
the size and eligibility of the RRP Facility is one potential approach to
preserve bank balance sheet space during future rounds of QE. A more
ambitious approach would be to use a Central Bank Digital Currency
that could be traded outside of the banking system to pay for assets in
future rounds of QE.

6. Conclusion

There has been a large expansion in the amount of central bank
reserves outstanding following multiple rounds of QE. This paper de-
velops and estimates a structural model of the U.S. banking system to
analyze the effect of an increase in central bank reserve supply on bank
lending and deposit taking. Our framework has two key factors that
determine the impact of reserve injections on the banking system. The
first one is the demand elasticity banks face in their respective deposit
and loan markets. The second one is how banks’ cost of capital depends
on their balance sheet composition, where the effect of reserve holdings
on the cost of capital is of particular importance.

One main challenge in estimating our model is that reserve supply
increases are endogenous. In particular, reserve supply increased due
to QE, which was implemented in response to the 2008 financial crisis
and the Covid-19 pandemic. To avoid confounding by the direct effect
of these crises, we estimate our structural model using cross-sectional
variation unrelated to QE.

In our estimated model, the increase in reserve supply from 2008
to 2017 reduces firm loans extended by an average of $134.2 billion,
which amounts to 7.7 cents in bank lending crowded out per dollar of
reserves injected. The impact on mortgage lending and deposit taking
is more attenuated. Our model-generated reserve spread closely follows
the observed IOER-FFR spread in the data. Importantly, the reduction
in bank lending to firms following reserve increases may counteract
the stimulative impacts of QE’s asset purchases. This counterproductive
effect of the reserve supply channel we document is important to
consider when thinking about the design of unconventional monetary
policy and bank regulation going forward.

Jiang: Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal anal-
ysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Yiming Ma: Methodology, In-
vestigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Con-
ceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

I have nothing to disclose.

Data availability

The Reserve Supply Channel of Unconventional Monetary Policy (R
eference data) (Mendeley Data).

Appendix. Additional proofs and derivations

A.1. Derivation of Eqs. (6)–(8) in Section 2

Taking the derivatives on the left-hand side of Eqs. (2) to (4) yields

𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

(𝑅𝐷,𝑚
𝑡

− 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡) − 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 =

𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡

(𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑚

𝑡

) + 𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 =

𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

(𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝐿,𝑚

𝑡

) + 𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 =

𝑅𝑆,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑆,𝑚

𝑡

=

𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

,

𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

,

,

.

(A.1)

(A.2)

(A.3)

(A.4)

Dividing Eqs. (A.1)–(A.3) respectively by
yields

𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

,

𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡

, and

𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝑅𝐷,𝑚
𝑡

− 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 −

𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑚

𝑡

+

𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝑅𝐿,𝑚

𝑡 +

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑅𝑆,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑆,𝑚

𝑡

=

=

=

=

𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡

,

,

,

.

(A.5)

(A.6)

(A.7)

(A.8)

If we take the left-hand side of Eqs. (A.5)–(A.7) as a function respec-
tively of the quantities 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡, 𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 and 𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡, we can implicitly
differentiate this system of equations to see how the bank responds to
an exogenous increase in its security holdings 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡. If we differentiate
this system with respect to 𝑄𝑆,𝑚𝑡, we obtain Eqs. (6)–(8) in the main
text.

A.2. Detailed derivations for Section 3

A.2.1. Characterization of demand system

Eq. (12) gives the probability 𝑃𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡|𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡

that agent j chooses bank
m conditional on its realized value of 𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡. Integrating 𝑃𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡|𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡
over the measure 𝜇(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) yields the quantity chosen from bank m

𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 ∫

∞

exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡) exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡)

exp(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) + ∑

𝑚′>0 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

−∞

𝑑𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡.

(A.9)

CRediT authorship contribution statement

William Diamond: Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisi-
tion, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Zhengyang

If we define

𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 ∫

∞

−∞

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡)

exp(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) + ∑

𝑚′>0 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

𝑑𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡

(A.10)

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388714W. Diamond et al.

then the quantity 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 chosen from bank m in market n at time 𝑡 is

A.2.3. Explicit expression for 𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = 𝑈𝐷,𝑛𝑡 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡).

(A.11)

Taking the log of Eq. (A.11) yields Eq. (13) that we use to estimate 𝛼𝐷
and 𝛽𝐷.17

A.2.2. Estimating the aggregate elasticity of demand

Next, we characterize the aggregate elasticity of deposit demand
relative to the outside option. This is necessary because unlike in a
standard logit demand system, we do not observe the quantity chosen
of the outside good. If we sum Eq. (A.9) over all banks m in a market,
we get that the total deposit quantity 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 equals

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 =∫

∞

−∞

𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) ∑
exp(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) + ∑

𝑚>0 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)

𝑚′>0 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

𝑑𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡.

(A.13)

If we define

𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = log(

∑

𝑚

exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡))

(A.14)

We use Eq. (A.11) to write an individual bank’s deposit quantity as

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = ∫

∞

−∞

𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)
exp(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) + ∑
𝑚′>0 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

𝑑𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡.

(A.19)

The total quantity of deposits in a market is, summing over 𝑚 > 0,

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 =∫

∞

−∞

𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) ∑
exp(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) + ∑

𝑚>0 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)

𝑚′>0 exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

𝑑𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡.

(A.20)

Taking the ratio of the expressions in Eqs. (A.19)–(A.20) yields

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡

=

∑

exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)
𝑚′ exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + log

exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)
𝑚′ exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

∑

= log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + 𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 − 𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 − 𝜓 𝑢

𝐷,𝑛𝑡.

(A.21)

(A.22)

(A.23)

to represent the desirability of a ‘‘composite good’’ provided by all
banks operating in the market, the total quantity of deposits equals

Averaging the expression in Eq. (A.23) across the 𝑁𝑛𝑡 different banks
𝑚 in time 𝑡 at time 𝑡 yields

∞

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 ∫

−∞

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) exp(𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡)
exp(𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡) + exp(𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡)

𝑑𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡.

(A.15)

1
𝑁𝑛𝑡

∑

𝑚

log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡) = log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡) +

1
𝑁𝑛𝑡

∑

𝑚

(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷

)

− 𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡,

After the change of variables 𝑢 = 𝛿𝐷,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 − 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 in the integral,

Eq. (A.15) becomes18

∞

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 ∫

−∞

= 𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡) ∫

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜[𝑢 + 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡]) exp(𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡)
exp(𝑢 + 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡) + exp(𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡)
exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝑢)
1 + exp(𝑢)

𝑑𝑢.

∞

−∞

𝑑𝑢

(A.16)

(A.17)

since the market-specific mean of 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 is 𝜓 𝑢
sion we use to compute 𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 directly from data

𝐷,𝑛𝑡. This yields the expres-

𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 =

1
𝑁𝑛𝑡

∑

𝑚

(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷

)

−

1
𝑁𝑛𝑡

∑

𝑚

log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡).

(A.24)

Eq. (A.17) implies the following log-linear specification that we use

(A.25)

to estimate 𝛽𝐷,𝑜

log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡) = 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + log

[
𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 ∫

∞

−∞

]

𝑑𝑢

.

(A.18)

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝑢)
1 + exp(𝑢)
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + 𝜓 𝑢

𝐷,𝑛𝑡, where 𝜓 𝑜

In Eq. (A.18), we can write 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 can be
computed from observable data based on Eq. (A.25) once 𝛼𝐷 and 𝛽𝐷
are estimated. With an instrument for 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡, we can then estimate 𝛽𝐷,𝑜
by two-stage least squares. The identifying assumption is that the unob-
servable 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓 𝑢
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + log 𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 is uncorrelated with the instrument. After
𝛽𝐷,𝑜 is estimated, the only term in Eq. (A.18) that changes when banks’
change their interest rates is the observable term 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡. Eq. (A.18)
therefore determines how aggregate quantities respond to rate changes,
and Eq. (A.11) pins down the distribution of deposits between banks.
We therefore have a completely specified demand system once 𝛼𝐷, 𝛽𝐷,
and 𝛽𝐷,𝑜 are estimated.

17 Note that for our loan market following a standard logit demand system,
we have 𝛿𝐿,𝑗𝑛0𝑡 = 0 for all j and the outside good quantity 𝑄𝐿,𝑛0𝑡 is observed.
If there is a total funding need 𝐹 𝐿,𝑛𝑡 (which is observable since we see 𝑄𝐿,𝑛0𝑡)
for loans in market n at time 𝑡, we get the related expression for the quantity
chosen from bank k

𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = 𝐹 𝐿,𝑛𝑡

exp(𝛼𝐿𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐿 + 𝛿𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡)
𝑚′>0 exp(𝛼𝐿𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐿,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐿 + 𝛿𝐿,𝑛𝑚′𝑡)

1 + ∑

.

(A.12)

This also yields a log-linear expression of the form in Eq. (A.11) that allows
us to estimate 𝛼𝐿 and 𝛽𝐿 by two stage least squares. We can then solve for
each market for the values of 𝛿𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 that uniquely rationalize our quantity data
𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡.

18 Note that the change of variable 𝑣 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑢) implies that ∫ ∞
−∞

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝑢)
1+exp(𝑢)

𝑑𝑢 =

𝑣𝛽𝐷,𝑜
𝑣(1+𝑣)

𝑑𝑣 < ∫ ∞

∫ ∞
0
in the paper lie in this range, so our demand system is well specified.

0 𝑣(𝛽𝐷,𝑜−2)𝑑𝑣 is finite for any 0 < 𝛽𝐷,𝑜 < 1. All of our estimates

We also have from the original definition 𝜓 𝑜

𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

=

𝜕𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

= 𝛼𝐷

∑

= 𝛼𝐷

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡

.

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 − 𝜓 𝑢
(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 that
)

exp

𝑚′>0 exp

(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡

)

(A.26)

A.2.4. Derivation of individual bank and market-level demand curves

Taking the derivative of the expression in Eq. (A.23) for log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

yields

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

= 𝛼𝐷 +

= 𝛼𝐷 +

−

(

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝜓 𝑜
(

𝐷,𝑛𝑡

𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

− 1

) 𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
)

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡

− 1

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡

= 𝛼𝐷 + 𝛼𝐷

= 𝛼𝐷 + 𝛼𝐷(𝛽𝐷,𝑜 − 1)

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡

.

(A.27)

(A.28)

(A.29)

(A.30)

In Eq. (A.30), we apply our log-linear expression in Eq. (A.18) which
. We similarly have that if another bank 𝑚′ ≠ 𝑚
yields 𝛽𝐷,𝑜 =
changes its interest rate, the quantity 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 changes as

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡

=

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡

−

𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡

= 𝛼𝐷(𝛽𝐷,𝑜 − 1)

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚′𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡

.

(A.31)

The log-linear expression in Eq. (16) allows us to derive an expression
for the impact of an individual bank’s rates on market-level quantities:

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388715W. Diamond et al.

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

= 𝛽𝐷,𝑜

𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

=

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡

𝛼𝐷𝛽𝐷,𝑜.

(A.32)

in Eq. (A.26). Summing
In Eq. (A.32) we use the expression for
Eq. (A.32) across all banks in the time 𝑡 at time 𝑡 gives an expression
for how total quantities respond when all banks raise their rates:

𝜕𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

𝜕 log 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑡

= 𝛼𝐷𝛽𝐷,𝑜.

A.2.5. Exclusion restriction

(A.33)

This appendix provides formal assumptions under which our instru-
ment in Eq. (17) is valid. Our instrument is based on disaster damage,
𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡, that occurs in each county 𝑛 at time 𝑡. The damage that occurs
in county 𝑛 can be correlated with borrower and/or lender demand
in county 𝑛. However, we assume that only damage in county 𝑛 has
any impact on demand in that county. As a result, if banks change
their interest rates in counties 𝑛′ other than 𝑛 in response to 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡,
we have a supply shock in county 𝑛′ that is not correlated with local
demand.

To get a simple expression for total quantities 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 in time 𝑡 at time

𝑡, recall the definition of our inclusive value

𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = log

(

∑

𝑚

exp(𝛼𝐷𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 + 𝑋𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡𝛽𝐷 + 𝛿𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡)

(A.34)

)

that represents the desirability of a ‘‘composite good’’ provided by
all banks operating in the market. We derive in Eq. (A.18) of Ap-
pendix A.2.1 the following log-linear expression for the quantity 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡
of deposits in time 𝑡 at time 𝑡

log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡) = 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + log

[
𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡 ∫

∞

−∞

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝑢)
1 + exp(𝑢)

]

𝑑𝑢

.

(A.35)

This log-linear relationship between the total market-level 𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡 and the
inclusive value 𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 justifies our usage of a linear instrumental variable
regression to estimate 𝛽𝐷,𝑜. To estimate 𝛽𝐷,𝑜, we use the decomposition
𝜓𝐷,𝑛𝑡 = 𝜓 𝑜
𝐷,𝑛𝑡 can be
computed from observable data (with an expression in Eq. (A.25)) and
𝜓 𝑢

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 described in Section 3.1.1, where 𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + 𝜓 𝑢

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 is unobserved.

Define 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡 = 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝛿𝑢

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + log(𝐹 𝐷,𝑛𝑡) + log(∫ ∞

−∞

exp(𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝑢)
1+exp(𝑢)

𝑑𝑢), so we

(A.36)

have

log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡) = 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡 + 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡.

𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡 captures the impact of all unobservable demand shocks on total
quantities in time 𝑡 at time 𝑡. Our identifying assumption is that
𝐸(𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡|𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐
where 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐
is the vector of all property damage amounts across
markets 𝑛 at time 𝑡. It follows that if we condition on the entire vector
of disaster shocks 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐

) = 𝐸(𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡|𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡),

(A.37)

,

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝐸(log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡)|𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐

𝑡

) = 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝐸(𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡|𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐

𝑡

)+𝐸(𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡|𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡).

(A.38)

𝑡

Conditional on the demand shock in region 𝑛 at time 𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡,
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡 is independent of the remaining demand shock realizations in
𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐
. This conditional independence helps us justify the validity of
any instrument 𝑍𝑛𝑡 that is a function of the vector 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐
of disaster
damage quantities across regions 𝑛. Conditioning on the vector 𝑍𝑣𝑒𝑐
of
all 𝑍𝑛𝑡 at time 𝑡 conditions only on information contained in the vector
𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑐
of time 𝑡 disaster shocks. The construction of our market-
level instrument in Eq. (17) is an example of such a scalar 𝑍𝑛𝑡. By the
law of iterated expectations,

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝐸(log(𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑡)|𝑍𝑣𝑒𝑐

𝑡

, 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡) = 𝛽𝐷,𝑜𝐸(𝜓 𝑜

𝐷,𝑛𝑡|𝑍𝑣𝑒𝑐

𝑡

, 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡) + 𝐸(𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡|𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡).

(A.39)

After conditioning on 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡,
the residual 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑡 error term
in Eq. (A.39) is uncorrelated not only with 𝑍𝑛𝑡 but also with 𝑍𝑛′𝑡 for
all other 𝑛′. It follows that 𝑍𝑣𝑒𝑐
satisfies the strict exogeneity condition
needed to be a valid instrument when a time fixed effect is included.
It is necessary to control for 𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 to insure the validity of our
instrument, which we do in our empirical specifications.

𝑡

A.3. Cost function estimation

This appendix provides additional details of how we estimate the
cost function for banks to have deposits, mortgages, corporate loans,
and securities on its balance sheet. We first infer a bank’s marginal
costs of holding deposits, mortgages, and loans from the following
expressions.

−

−

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

−

− 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = −𝑅𝐷,𝑚

𝑡

+

− 𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = −𝑅𝑀,𝑚

𝑡

−

− 𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡 = −𝑅𝐿,𝑚

𝑡 −

𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

.

,

(A.40)

(A.41)

(A.42)

, 𝑅𝐿,𝑚
𝑡

, 𝑅𝑀,𝑚
𝑡

rates and markups
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
, 𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
, and
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡

The left-hand side of Eqs. (A.40) to (A.42) depend only on observed in-
so we can infer
terest
the marginal costs
𝜕𝐶(𝛩𝑚𝑡)
up to the value of unknown constants
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝑅𝐷,𝑚
. These constants are market-wide discount rates re-
𝑡
flecting the riskiness of cash flows from deposits, mortgages, and loans,
so they do not depend on the composition 𝛩𝑚𝑡 of the bank’s balance
sheet. Hence, we can replace the marginal costs on the left-hand sides of
Eqs. (20) to (21) with their observable counterparts from Eqs. (A.40) to
(A.42). The right-hand sides would change only in their intercept since
the discount rates 𝑅𝐷,𝑚
does not depend on the composition
of the bank’s balance sheet. The bank-level marginal cost estimates we
use are then averages of our bank-market level estimates

, 𝑅𝑀,𝑚
𝑡

, 𝑅𝐿,𝑚
𝑡

𝑡

1
𝑁𝐷,𝑛𝑡

∑
(

−

𝑛

𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡

− 𝑅𝐷,𝑛𝑚𝑡) = 𝑀𝐶𝐷,𝑚𝑡

(A.43)

1
𝑁𝑀,𝑛𝑡 + 𝑁𝐿,𝑛𝑡

∑

[(

−

𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡

− 𝑅𝑀,𝑛𝑚𝑡)

𝑛
𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡
𝜕𝑄𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡∕𝜕𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡

∑

(−

+

𝑛

− 𝑅𝐿,𝑛𝑚𝑡)] = 𝑀𝐶𝐿∗,𝑚𝑡.

(A.44)

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103887.

References

Acharya, V.V., Rajan, R., 2021. Liquidity, liquidity everywhere, not a drop to use:
Why flooding banks with central bank reserves may not expand liquidity. National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Akkus, O., Cookson, J.A., Hortacsu, A., 2016. The determinants of bank mergers: A

revealed preference analysis. Manage. Sci. 62 (8), 2241–2258.

Albertazzi, U., Burlon, L., Jankauskas, T., Pavanini, N., 2022. The shadow value of

unconventional monetary policy. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP17053.

Bartik, T.J., 1991. Who benefits

from state and local economic development

policies? WE Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Kalamazoo, MI.

Bernanke, B.S., Blinder, A.S., 1988. Credit, money, and aggregate demand. Amer. Econ.

Rev. 78 (2), 435–439.

Berry, S.T., 1994. Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. Rand J.

Econ. 242–262.

Bord, V.M., 2017. Bank consolidation and financial inclusion: The adverse effects of

bank mergers on depositors. Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University.

Bräuning, F., 2017. The liquidity effect of the federal reserve’s balance sheet reduction
on short-term interest rates. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research Paper Series
Current Policy Perspectives Paper, 18–1.

Bretscher, L., Schmid, L., Sen, I., Sharma, V., 2020. Institutional corporate bond

demand. Available at SSRN 3756280.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388716W. Diamond et al.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and

Kandrac, J., Schlusche, B., 2021. Quantitative easing and bank risk taking: Evidence

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

from lending. J. Money Credit Bank. 53 (4), 635–676.

Chakraborty,

I., Goldstein,

I., MacKinlay, A., 2018. Housing price booms and

crowding-out effects in bank lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (7), 2806–2853.
Chakraborty, I., Goldstein, I., MacKinlay, A., 2020. Monetary stimulus and bank lending.

Kashyap, A.K., Rajan, R., Stein, J.C., 2002. Banks as liquidity providers: An explanation
for the coexistence of lending and deposit-taking. J. Finance 57 (1), 33–73.
Koijen, R.S., Koulischer, F., Nguyen, B., Yogo, M., 2021. Inspecting the mechanism of

J. Financ. Econ. 136 (1), 189–218.

Christensen, J.H., Krogstrup, S., 2019. Transmission of quantitative easing: The role of

central bank reserves. Econ. J. 129 (617), 249–272.

Correa, R., Du, W., Liao, G.Y., 2020. US banks and global liquidity. Tech. Rep., National

Bureau of Economic Research.

quantitative easing in the Euro area. J. Financ. Econ. 140 (1), 1–20.

Koijen, R.S., Richmond, R.J., Yogo, M., 2020. Which Investors Matter for Equity
Valuations and Expected Returns? Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Koijen, R.S., Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. J. Polit.

Cortés, K.R., Strahan, P.E., 2017. Tracing out capital flows: How financially integrated

Econ. 127 (4), 1475–1515.

banks respond to natural disasters. J. Financ. Econ. 125 (1), 182–199.

Koijen, R.S., Yogo, M., 2020. Exchange Rates and Asset Prices in a Global Demand

Craig, B.R., Ma, Y., 2022. Intermediation in the interbank lending market. J. Financ.

System. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Econ. 145 (2), 179–207.

Diamond, W., 2020. Safety transformation and the structure of the financial system. J.

Finance 75, 2973–3012. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12967.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. The Effects of Quantitative Easing on
Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy. Tech. Rep., National Bureau
of Economic Research.

Diamond, D.W., Dybvig, P.H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. J.

Li, W., Ma, Y., Zhao, Y., 2023. The passthrough of treasury supply to bank deposit

Political Econ. 91 (3), 401–419.

funding. Columbia Business School Research Paper.

Diamond, D.W., Rajan, R.G., 2000. A theory of bank capital. J. Finance 55 (6),

McFadden, D., 1974. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. Front.

2431–2465.

Econometrics 105–142.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2017. The deposits channel of monetary policy.

Rodnyansky, A., Darmouni, O.M., 2017. The effects of quantitative easing on bank

Q. J. Econ. 132 (4), 1819–1876.

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility:

Evidence from the US banking sector. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 169–216.

Elenev, V., Landvoigt, T., Shultz, P.J., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. Can monetary
policy create fiscal capacity?. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gagnon, J., Raskin, M., Remache, J., Sack, B.P., 2010. Large-Scale Asset Purchases by

the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? FRB of New York Staff Report 441.

Hanson, S.G., Shleifer, A., Stein, J.C., Vishny, R.W., 2015. Banks as patient fixed-income

investors. J. Financ. Econ. 117 (3), 449–469.

lending behavior. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (11), 3858–3887.

Scharfstein, D., Sunderam, A., 2016. Market power

in mortgage lending and
the transmission of monetary policy. 2, Unpublished working paper. Harvard
University.

Schwert, M., 2018. Bank capital and lending relationships. J. Finance 73 (2), 787–830.
Wang, Y., Whited, T.M., Wu, Y., Xiao, K., 2022. Bank market power and monetary
policy transmission: evidence from a structural estimation. J. Finance 77 (4),
2093–2141.

Xiao, K., 2020. Monetary transmission through shadow banks. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33

Jiang, Z., Richmond, R., Zhang, T., 2020. A portfolio approach to global imbalances.

(6), 2379–2420.

Available at SSRN.

Kandrac, J., Kokas, S., Kontonikas, A., 2021. Unconventional monetary policy and the

search for yield. Working paper.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10388717