Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The effects of policy interventions to limit illegal money lending✩
Kaiwen Leong a, Huailu Li b,c, Nicola Pavanini d,e,∗, Christoph Walsh f,e
a Griffith University, Department of Accounting, Finance and Economics, Australia
b Fudan University, School of Economics, China
c Shanghai Institute of International Finance and Economics, China
d Tilburg University, Department of Finance, Netherlands
e Centre for Economic Policy Research, United Kingdom
f Tilburg University, Department of Econometrics and Operations Research, Netherlands

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We estimate a structural model of borrowing and lending in the illegal money lending market using a unique
panel survey of 1,090 borrowers taking out 11,032 loans from loan sharks. We use the model to evaluate the
effects of interventions aimed at limiting this market. We find that an enforcement crackdown that occurred
during our sample period increased lenders’ unit cost of harassment and interest rates, while lowering volume
of loans, lender profits and borrower welfare. Policies removing borrowers in the middle of the repayment
ability distribution, reducing gambling or reducing time discounting are also effective at lowering lender
profitability.

Dataset link: Leong, Kaiwen; Li, Huailu; Pavan
ini, Nicola; Walsh, Christoph (2024), ‘‘FINEC-
D-23-00516_Leong-Li-Pavanini-Walsh_The-Effe
cts-of-Policy-Interventions-to-Limit-Illegal-Mon
ey-Lending’’, Mendeley Data, V2, (Reference da
ta)

Keywords:
Illegal money lending
Loan sharks
Law enforcement
Crime
Structural estimation

1. Introduction

Illegal money lending (IML), often also referred to as usury or
loansharking, is the practice of lending money at rates higher than
the legally prescribed limit, using illegal harassment methods for loan
recollection, and attempting to lock borrowers into never ending debt
traps (Kaplan and Matteis, 1968). This is a large scale phenomenon
that is widespread across countries1 and has existed for a very long

time. Laws banning individuals from charging excessive interest rates
have existed at least as early as the Babylonian Code of Hammurabi
from 1800 BC, and were present in the Old Testament and in Roman
Law (Blitz and Long, 1965). These bans exist because this market
generates severe negative externalities. Lenders are part of criminal
organizations that use IML to launder money and conceal profits from
other criminal activities, and because borrowers, rejected by any legal

✩

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. This research was partially funded by a Singapore Ministry of Education Tier 1 grant (Grant Name: MOE AcRF
Tier 1; Grant Number : 2015-T1-002-061). The data used in this paper were collected by Leong who first obtained approval to collect this dataset by writing
to the appropriate Singaporean authorities. He obtained ethics approval from the Nanyang Technological University Institutional Review Board (NTU IRB). We
thank Sumit Agarwal, Alan Krueger, Kevin Lang, Edward Lazear, Thomas Lemieux, Claudia Robles-Garcia, Jia Panle Barwick and seminar participants at Tilburg,
NTU, Purdue, Fudan, the 2022 NBER IO Spring Meeting (Stanford SIEPR), Pavia, Bristol, Mannheim, Nova SBE, NUS, the Barcelona Summer Forum, the Bocconi
EEA-ESEM Congress, Helsinki GSE, and CEIBS for their helpful comments and suggestions. The usual caveat applies. Nicola Pavanini gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the European Research Council under the Grant Agreement No. 101042069.

∗ Corresponding author at: Tilburg University, Department of Finance, Netherlands.

E-mail addresses: kleong@ntu.edu.sg (K. Leong), huailuli@fudan.edu.cn (H. Li), n.pavanini@tilburguniversity.edu (N. Pavanini),

c.b.t.walsh@tilburguniversity.edu (C. Walsh).

1 In 2004 around 1% of households in the UK were in debt to an illegal lender (Payne et al., 2020), while in Germany and France the incidence of illegal
lending is respectively 2.5 and 3 times higher than in the UK (Ellison et al., 2006). In 2009 in Italy, loansharking raised profits of €15bn (1% of GDP) to organized
crime (Schneider, 2013). In 1990 in the US proceeds from loansharking were estimated to be around $14bn, 0.2% of GDP (Levi and Reuter, 2006). Public reports
on IML can also be found for various East Asian countries, including China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Thailand, and Singapore.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103894
Received 21 June 2023; Received in revised form 7 June 2024; Accepted 7 June 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)103894Availableonline15June20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).K. Leong et al.

creditor, mostly invest IML loans into addictive activities such as gam-
bling, drugs and alcohol (Financial Conduct Authority, 2017; Marinaro,
2017).

On the one hand, due to its detrimental effects on society, law
enforcement has exerted considerable effort to eradicate this phe-
nomenon (Savona and Riccardi, 2015). Interventions range from re-
sources to the police force to arrest lenders and other members of
the criminal organizations they belong to Home Office (2018), DFAT
(2019), to support programs for borrowers via rehabilitation strategies,
formal-market alternatives, or financial education.2 On the other hand,
the presence of IML is enhanced by the widespread worldwide adoption
of interest rate caps (Maimbo and Henriquez, 2014), which limit access
to legal credit for risky borrowers (Temin and Voth, 2008), fostering
demand for illegal lending.

Despite the importance of IML historically and worldwide, in the
literature there is neither a quantification of the effects of such in-
terventions in this market, nor a clear understanding of the main
incentives that drive borrowers and lenders. The reason is that reliable
and large scale transaction-level data on the IML market do not exist,
because lenders are part of organized criminal groups that operate un-
der the radar of law enforcement, and because borrowers are vulnerable
individuals who fear both the consequences of reporting their loan
sharks and the stigma of admitting their financial troubles.

In this paper we overcome these challenges with novel data which
allow us to estimate a structural model of the IML market to simulate
the effects of various policy interventions. We do this using a survey of
11,032 loans granted by loan sharks to 1,090 borrowers, representing
the largest dataset of this kind to the best of our knowledge. Our
counterfactuals evaluate the effects of three kinds of policy interven-
tions. First, we document that a crackdown on lenders that occurred
during our sample period was highly successful at lowering the volume
of disbursed loans and the profits of lenders. Second, we show that
removing borrowers from this market, either through offering formal
market alternatives by relaxing interest rate caps, or via rehabilitation
and education programs, also hurts lenders, particularly if they focus
on medium-performing borrowers in terms of loan repayment ability.
Third, indirect interventions that reduce gambling and drug use, or
ones that reduce time discounting through improved financial literacy,
are also effective at lowering lender profits, primarily through reduced
loan demand.

Our data are from Singapore, which is an interesting context to
study IML because of its prevalence during our sample period. Accord-
ing to the Singapore Police Force’s 2010 Annual Crime Brief, more than
half of the crimes committed in Singapore are related to the IML mar-
ket. This is because IML is run by transnational criminal organizations
involved in various illegal activities and Singapore is an important hub
for their operations in Southeast Asia (Emmers, 2003). Furthermore, we
collected evidence (documented in Section 2.2) that the transnational
crime syndicates operating in Singapore also operate across Southeast
Asia and China using the same IML operating model. Singapore is
therefore also an interesting context to study the IML market because it
has a similar market structure to many other Southeast Asian countries
(which have a combined population of over 2 billion people).

Our model and findings also highlight the unique features that
make IML different from other formal and informal credit markets
with predatory lending practices, such as payday loans, pawnbroking,
subprime lending, and informal lending. First, as in several other illegal
markets, IML is organized as a non-competitive cartel run by transna-
tional criminal syndicates, which implies that policymakers cannot
regulate it and instead aim to eradicate it. In Singapore, the dominant

criminal syndicates set the loan contract terms (interest rate, maturity,
frequency of repayment installments) equivalently for all lenders, al-
lowing them only to adjust the loan size within limits. These syndicates
also set loan terms this way in the other countries where it operates,
such as Malaysia and China. Second, being unregulated, lenders in
IML engage in severe and illegal harassment methods to recollect
payments. Third, loansharking features a particular loan structure with
loan reset in case of missed payments, explicitly aimed at debt trapping
borrowers. Last, borrowers have very poor creditworthiness, as they
are rejected by all sources of formal credit. As we will document, all
borrowers in our sample stated they were unable to borrow from the
formal sector, including payday lenders and peer-to-peer platforms.3

Our structural framework incorporates these specific features of the
IML market, as well as aspects that are common in formal credit mar-
kets. In our model, borrowers decide how much to borrow and which
lender to borrow from. When approached by a borrower, the lender
decides whether to give them the loan or not, or to give a smaller loan,
and how harsh to be in response to missed payments. The harshness
level the lender chooses is the probability of harassing the borrower
after a missed payment. They choose the loan size and harshness
level based on their estimate of the borrower’s ability to repay, which
depends on the borrower’s characteristics and past loan performance.
The harshness level chosen by the lender can also impact the borrower’s
ability to repay through the threat of harassment. Lenders thus face a
trade-off that larger loans provide larger interest payments but are more
difficult for borrowers to repay, while higher harshness levels increase
repayment ability but are more costly. Borrowers then choose the
lender to maximize their expected discounted payoffs, where lenders
are heterogeneous in harshness. Borrowers exhibit quasi-hyperbolic
discounting and low degrees of risk aversion, and obtain disutility from
harassment. Borrower payoffs depend on the expected size of the loan,
expected harshness level, the expected number of missed payments, and
the associated penalties and harassment from those missed payments.
We structurally estimate the model using the observed loan outcomes
in our data to evaluate the effects of various market interventions.

Our data detail many loan characteristics, such as the requested
and granted loan amount, interest rate, number of missed payments,
and harassment used by the lender. We also surveyed the character-
istics of the borrowers, such as their demographics and addictions.
Our borrower panel survey was conducted over 2009–2016. In 2014,
the authorities increased the resources targeting the IML market. This
crackdown was successful at causing a large number of lenders to exit
the market, often through arrest. The crackdown increased in the cost
of lending, which caused the interest rate in the market to increase. The
implied annual percentage rate (APR) increased from 261% to 562%.
We use our estimated model to compute the effects of this crackdown
by simulating what would have happened had it not occurred. We
find that the crackdown caused the volume of loans to fall by 48.6%,
lender profits by 67.7% and borrower surplus by 12.4%. We also use
our model to decompose the effects of the crackdown. Absent the
corresponding interest rate increase, the increase in harassment costs
would have caused lenders to barely break even, motivating why the
cartel increased its rates in response to the crackdown.

We are not able to model the syndicates’ interest rate setting due to
very limited price variation in our sample and a lack of data on the syn-
dicates’ costs and other sources of profits. Nevertheless, to investigate
the optimality of their interest rates pre and post crackdown within
the context of their loansharking profits from lenders, we conduct a
counterfactual to quantify the impact on lenders’ profits of changing
the common interest rate charged to all borrowers. We find that before

2 Several governmental and non-governmental organizations provide these
kinds of services to borrowers victims of loan sharks, both in Singapore (Credit
Counseling Singapore - https://ccs.org.sg/) and in other countries (Stop Loan
Sharks in the UK - https://www.stoploansharks.co.uk/).

3 In Section A.2 in the Online Appendix, we provide additional details
on the differences between IML and other credit markets, together with
information from interviews we carried out with those involved in those
markets.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038942K. Leong et al.

the crackdown the syndicates could have made more profits by raising
rates, whereas after the crackdown the interest rate we observe in
the data was the profit maximizing one. We interpret the suboptimal
choice of lower rates in the pre-crackdown period as determined by
the incentive to: (i) mitigate the risk of one syndicate deviating from
the collusive equilibrium, (ii) deter entry of new syndicates, and (iii)
avoid raising too much attention from law enforcement. The higher
rates in the post period are instead justified by the substantial increase
in harassment costs.

Next, we conduct a counterfactual to compare the crackdown to
an alternative policy that involves targeting the borrowers instead. We
group borrowers into twenty groups of equal loan demand based on
their repayment ability and consider removing each group one at a
time. Borrowers could be removed in practice through rehabilitation
strategies or education programs that deter them from borrowing, as
the majority of loans in our data are taken out for gambling reasons,
but also by offering them a formal-market alternative by relaxing
the interest rate cap. We find that removing the middle-performing
borrowers lowers the profits of lenders the most. Borrowers with the
highest repayment ability have smaller expected harassment costs, yet
earn lenders little in missed payment penalties. Borrowers with the
smallest repayment ability earn lenders the most in missed payment
penalties, but lenders need to conduct more harassment to recover the
loan. Due to these higher costs, lenders only give smaller loans to these
borrowers. Borrowers in the middle of the distribution are the most
profitable borrowers for lenders, and targeting these would be the most
effective strategy at lowering lenders’ profits. This is in contrast to the
results found by Agarwal et al. (2015) for the credit card market, who
show that consumers at the bottom of the FICO score distribution are
the most profitable. The difference with our findings is likely driven
by the high monitoring and recollection costs of the riskiest segment of
IML borrowers.

Finally, we conduct a set of counterfactuals to evaluate the impact
of indirect interventions on lender profitability. We find that poli-
cies aiming to reduce gambling, drug use, or heavy time discounting
(through improvements in financial literacy) indirectly reduce lender
profitability in the IML market. For the median borrower, stopping
them from gambling reduces the profits of the lender it chooses by
26%. Although non-gamblers have a higher repayment ability and are
less costly to serve, they demand smaller loans which reduces profits.
Reducing a borrower’s present bias or heavy time discounting also has
a large effect on lender profits, with the size of the effect increasing in
their initial discounting.

In our counterfactuals we put more emphasis on interventions that
reduce lenders’ profits, aimed at eradicating IML markets, rather than
improving borrowers’ surplus within IML. We do so because we believe
that the primary goal of policymakers is to eliminate this illegal market,
due to its criminal nature and the negative externalities that it gener-
ates. In fact, even the kind of policies that target borrowers are aimed
at removing them from this market, rather than improving their surplus
from borrowing from loansharks.

Our model and findings also shed light on three key unexplored
features of formal credit markets. First, while most datasets only re-
port the granted loan amount, we can instead observe and model
borrowers’ desired loan amount and what lenders eventually decide
to grant. This allows us to separately quantify how a policy inter-
vention affects demanded and supplied quantity of credit. Second,
while monitoring plays a crucial role in theoretical models of financial
intermediation (Diamond, 1984), its empirical importance has not been
tested for high-risk consumer credit, and only just recently for large
commercial loans (Gustafson et al., 2021). We provide novel evidence
with detailed information on lenders’ use of a variety of harassment
methods, akin to monitoring in formal loans, which are likely to play
a key role in high credit risk sectors such as payday loans. Not only
we are able to model lenders’ optimal choice of harassment probabil-
ities, but can also recover harassment costs and how it incentivizes

borrowers’ effort in repayment, all features so far unexplored by the
literature on formal credit. Last, our second counterfactual quantifies an
important trade-off also present in legal credit markets. We show that
for lenders the most profitable borrowers are those that do miss some
repayments, as this delivers lenders revenues from financial penalties,
but that do not miss too many of them, which instead requires lenders
to incur substantial monitoring and recollection costs.

Related Literature Our paper contributes to three main strands of
the literature. The first is the growing field on the economics of illegal
markets. This branch of the literature has notable contribution both
in terms of theory (Becker et al., 2006; Galenianos et al., 2012) and
empirics (Adda et al., 2014; Jacobi and Sovinsky, 2016; Galenianos and
Gavazza, 2017; Leong et al., 2022), but is almost exclusively focused
on drug markets. A few recent papers have tried to connect financing
frictions with illegal activities, such as terrorism (Limodio, 2022), but
none of these have direct access to illegal loan contracts.4 We are the
first to develop an equilibrium model of the IML market to quantify
the main incentives that drive borrowers and lenders, and to evaluate
the effects of law enforcement, leveraging unique and extensive survey
data on a large fraction of illegal loan contracts in Singapore.

Our paper uses the same dataset as Lang et al. (2022), whose
contributions include describing how they collected data on this fi-
nancially vulnerable population, developing descriptive facts about this
understudied market, and summarizing the effects of the enforcement
crackdown on loan outcomes in reduced form. Our contributions rela-
tive to their work are as follows. First, we collect additional survey data
from borrowers and (former) lenders to better understand the structure
of the market they operate in and the relevant incentives and trade-offs
they face. Second, we combine this information with the loan-level data
also used by Lang et al. (2022) to develop and structurally estimate a
model of borrowing and lending in the IML market that captures its
specific features. Finally, we use this model to perform the following
policy counterfactuals. We quantify the impacts of the enforcement
crackdown on loan volume, lender profits and borrower welfare by
solving for the counterfactual loan outcomes under no crackdown, as
well decomposing the impacts of the harassment cost and interest rate
increases. We explore optimal cartel interest rate setting before and
after the crackdown. Furthermore, we determine which borrowers are
best to target in an intervention aimed at lowering lender profitability,
and explore the effects of indirect interventions that reduce gambling,
drug use or time discounting.

The second contribution we make is to the literature on predatory
lending practices. Among formal markets such as pawnbroking (Caskey,
1991) and subprime lending (Adams et al., 2009), the closest lend-
ing context to ours is that of payday loans (Stegman, 2007; Morse,
2011; Gathergood et al., 2019; Melzer, 2018). Both IML and pay-
day loans feature small loans with very high interest rates and short
maturities, granted to vulnerable borrowers with potential cognitive
biases (Bertrand and Morse, 2011). While Melzer (2011) shows that the
availability of payday loans in some US states does not alleviate bor-
rowers’ economic hardship, we provide a complementary angle, as the
lack of payday loans may be compensated by the presence of IML. The
literature has also shown that regulating formal predatory lending can
increase welfare by limiting repeated borrowing (Allcott et al., 2022)
or by prohibiting large penalties for deferred payments (Heidhues and
Kőszegi, 2010). These targeted interventions are however not feasible
in IML, due to its unregulated and criminal nature.

Our work is also related to the literature studying the effects of debt
collection regulations in the formal sector (Fedaseyeu, 2020; Romeo

4 Apart from our companion paper (Lang et al., 2022), to our knowl-
edge (Soudijn and Zhang, 2013) is the only other study with access to any
data on illegal loans, describing the ledger of a single lender that was seized
from a Dutch casino. We discuss our data relative to theirs in Section A.3 in
the Online Appendix.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038943K. Leong et al.

and Sandler, 2021; Fonseca, 2023). The crackdown on lenders making
harassment more costly in our setting is akin to a tightening of debt
collection laws intending to protect consumers. We contribute to this
literature by studying not only the effects of the crackdown on loan
outcomes, but also its effect on the lenders’ harassment strategies
themselves.

A related literature is also that of microfinance (Kaboski and
Townsend, 2011, 2012; de Quidt et al., 2018) and informal lend-
ing (Aleem, 1990), but these markets present at least three significant
differences to IML. First, microcredit has the objective of fighting
poverty and offering borrowers, mostly in rural areas in developing
countries, a more viable financial channel compared to alternative
credit means. IML is instead an extortionary practice that aims to
exploit vulnerable borrowers, and is mainly widespread in urban areas
in developed economies. Second, microfinance programs are mostly
promoted by governments, NGOs, and non-profit organizations, while
IML is dominated by large criminal organizations. Last, one of the main
objectives of microcredit is to stimulate investment by households and
small businesses (Kaboski and Townsend, 2011), while IML finances
individuals’ consumption and addictions, such as gambling. To sum
up, microcredit represents a recent best practice to provide financial
inclusion in developing countries, while IML is a criminal, old and
global phenomenon that authorities strive to eradicate.

Third, our paper also contributes to the growing area of structural
models quantifying the effects of market frictions and of policy in-
terventions in financial markets. In recent years several papers have
developed equilibrium frameworks of this kind, ranging from business
loans (Crawford et al., 2018), mortgages (Allen et al., 2019; Benetton,
2021), consumer credit (Einav et al., 2012), credit cards (Nelson, 2023),
deposits (Egan et al., 2017), insurance (Koijen and Yogo, 2016), and
others. We provide the first model of a unique, relevant, and under-
studied lending market, that of loan sharking. Our modeling approach
brings several novel features to this literature, specific of illegal money
lending. First, lenders can harass borrowers to enforce repayment, and
borrowers have a disutility from harassment. Second, lenders coordi-
nate on several loan features, are not cash constrained, and ultimately
decide on the loan size to give. Third, borrowers are present-biased,
often miss payments (but never strategically), and almost always end
up repaying the loan. Moreover, we provide a new perspective in
the debate on the effects of interest rate caps (Cuesta and Sepúlveda,
2021), quantifying how a relaxation of usury rates can hurt criminal
organizations active in IML.

2. Setting and data

The goal of this paper is to develop and estimate a structural model
of the IML market in order to evaluate the effects of different policy
counterfactuals on borrowers and lenders. In this section, we describe
the market structure, the standard loan contract, and other features of
the market that guide us in formulating our structural framework.

2.1. Data collection

To estimate our structural model, we use the same loan-level panel
dataset described in Lang et al. (2022). We provide an overview of the
data collection process and summary statistics here, but we refer the
reader to Lang et al. (2022) for additional details.

Similar to the strategy used by Blattman et al. (2017), we hired
and trained 48 survey enumerators who were previously involved in
the unlicensed lending market, as they had a good understanding of
the institutional details of our setting. This also had the advantage
that they could share their own experiences from borrowing from loan
sharks, which made the respondents more comfortable sharing their
own experiences. These enumerators initially went to locations where
borrowers frequented and asked about the lenders they borrowed from.

Based on the approximate total number of lenders known to market par-
ticipants, we estimate that they obtained information on the locations
and operating hours of approximately 90% of all lenders active at that
time. From this list of lenders and operating times, we chose a set of
random times and locations for the enumerators to visit to approach
borrowers who had visited a lender, to see if they would be willing to
participate in a survey about the market. From this list of borrowers,
we asked the enumerators to conduct interviews with a random 40%
of the borrowers. We did not interview the full list of borrowers
for financial reasons, as borrowers received S$20-40 for participating,
where in 2011 US$1 was approximately S$1.20–1.32 at the time. Out
of the list of 1,232 borrowers, the enumerators successfully completed
interviews with 1,123 respondents over 2011–2013.5 Respondents were
interviewed at least once per year about their latest loan transactions.
We gave a financial incentive to borrowers to provide physical evidence
of their transactions to ensure low recall error in our sample. These
included diaries, repayment schedule notes, text messages from lenders,
and ATM withdrawals. Because of the harsh penalties and harassment
associated with missing payments, borrowers kept records of their
repayment schedules. Interviews were 1-2 h long and were held in a
café chosen by the respondent. Over this period, 57.4% of borrowers
reported nine loans and 97.2% reported at least six loans.

After the crackdown on the market in 2014, we held follow-up inter-
views with each respondent. Due to financial constraints we only held
two follow-up interviews, once in 2015 and again in 2016. 1,090 of the
original 1,123 were successfully reinterviewed and 95.2% of borrowers
reported on two loans over this period. We constrain our sample to
the 1,090 borrowers who we successfully reinterviewed over 2015–
2016. The main reason for why the remaining 33 borrowers could not
be reinterviewed was because we were unable to make contact with
them. We believe the high initial take-up rate of 91.1%, together with
randomization over the times and locations the enumerators located
borrowers, rules out any concerns for sample selection. The full data
have information on 11,032 loans taken out by 1,090 borrowers over
2009–2016. For each loan, we observe the borrower’s demanded loan
size, lender’s identity, loan size issued by the lender, interest rate, re-
payment time, missed payment penalties, and harassment methods used
in the loan. We also observe a large number of borrower characteristics,
such as a sociodemographics and addictions.

2.2. The cartel of loan shark syndicates

To better understand the structure of the market and the lenders’
operating model, we carried out interviews with ex-IML lenders from
Singapore (4), Malaysia (2) and China (13). From these interviews, we
learned that during our sample period the IML market in China and
Southeast Asia was controlled by a cartel of on average 10 transnational
crime syndicates that were all headquartered in China. These syndicates
have branches in each country of operation across the region, which has
a combined population of over 2 billion people.6 Two of the lenders

5 Our sample does not contain any once-off borrowers. Our evidence
suggests, however, that these represent a negligible part of the market. With
a 91.1% initial take-up rate, we view our sample of borrowers taking out
multiple loans as representative. Table A.1 in the Online Appendix details the
reasons borrowers took out loans. The majority of loans were taken out for ad-
dictive habits prone to repeat borrowing, such as gambling, drugs and alcohol.
Furthermore, in parliament it was stated that the number of borrowers with a
‘‘genuine financial need’’ is ‘‘not very large’’, as Singapore offers many safety
nets for individuals with medical emergencies or unemployment (Singapore
High Court, 2012).

6 We also found news reports of loan sharks from Chinese syndicates being
arrested in Singapore (Chong, 2015), Vietnam (Thang, 2020), Thailand News
(2021b,a) and Indonesia (Tencent News, 2021), confirming their activity in
these countries. Moreover, Curtis et al. (2002) report a large rise in Chinese
criminal groups operating throughout the world since the 1990s, including

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038944K. Leong et al.

that we interviewed were active in both Singapore and China in the
past, and were able to confirm that the syndicate employed the same
operating model in each country of operation.

The syndicates recruit lenders via a formal interview process and
vetting procedure. The syndicates provide lenders with a start-up loan
of approximately S$50,000 (US$36,500) which they can use to lend out
to borrowers. The syndicates instruct their lenders to use a standardized
loan structure and common interest rate. Two of the ex-lenders we
spoke to told us the cartel of syndicates coordinated on this structure
and interest rate during our sample period. This is confirmed in our
data where we observe that all loans with lenders from different
syndicates have the same structure, and almost all loans have the same
interest rate at any given time.

The syndicates also provide lenders with a black-market database of
borrowers that they can use to screen them. Market insiders have told
us this database contains information on 350,000 borrowers. Much of
the information about a borrower in this database is from their Singpass
account, which is an online portal that allows citizens to view their
information related to different government agencies. This includes
their formal sector income and basic sociodemographic information,
such as age and education. The syndicates also advise lenders on the
traits of profitable borrowers. If the borrower is not in their database,
lenders will require the borrower to show them the information on their
Singpass account.

2.3. Standard loan structure

All loans in our sample follow the same payment structure which we
incorporate in our structural model. We explain this structure using a
S$1,000 principal as an example. Before the enforcement crackdown in
2014, the nominal interest rate charged by almost all lenders was 20%.
This means that for a S$1,000 loan, the borrower makes repayments of
S$200 per week for six weeks. In this market the lender always takes
the first payment from the borrower the moment the loan is issued. In
effect, the borrower receives only S$800 when taking out the loan, and
the loan has a 25% interest rate over a 5-week period. This implies an
annual percentage rate (APR) of 25% × 365
5×7

= 208.57%.

If a borrower misses a repayment, the lender punishes the borrower
in two ways: with harassment and a financial penalty with a loan
reset. Harassment can involve anything from threatening text messages,
to public shaming and to destruction of personal property.7 The way
in which the lender imposes the financial penalty is by returning all
previous payments made by the borrower back to them except one,
and restarting the loan. This remaining payment kept by the lender
is the financial penalty. In the context of the S$1,000 loan example,
if the borrower had made three payments totaling S$600 but missed
the fourth week’s payment, the lender would return S$400 back to
the borrower and keep the remaining $200 as a financial penalty. The
lender would then reset the loan and the borrower would be required
to make six payments each week starting in the following week. Thus
when a loan resets, it takes at least six weeks to repay, compared to
five weeks when the loan is first issued. The borrower cannot repay
early, and thus cannot use the cash returned to them to immediately
make some of these repayments. Lenders also do not accept partial

countries in Europe, North and South America and Southeast Asia. They
report loansharking to be among the criminal activities that these transnational
groups engage in. Thus the validity of our results may also extend beyond Asia
to markets where these syndicates are active.

7 In Table A.2 in the Online Appendix, we show all the harassment methods
and the proportion of loans in our data where each form of harassment method
was used.

repayments. The reason for this is because the financial penalties from
the loan reset feature is the main source of lenders’ profits.8

If a borrower misses a payment two consecutive weeks in a row,
they lender will almost always use a more severe harassment method
on the borrower. Because in this case the lender does not have any
past payments made by the borrower to punish them financially, the
borrower is required to come up with the payment by the end of that
week, or face much harsher harassment. This payment is the financial
penalty and does not count towards one of the six payments.

To complete a loan, the borrower must make their weekly payment
six weeks in a row. In our data, only 14.6% of loans are paid on time
within 6 weeks, but 97.5% are eventually repaid. The median and
modal loan is repaid after 12 weeks. In cases where the loan lasts up
to six months, the lender will make the borrower work for them to pay
off the remaining balance. This happens in 8.7% of loans in our data.
Table 1 shows summary statistics of the loan-level variables for the
subsample that we use in estimation. The median granted loan size is
S$1,000, which is approximately US$800 using the 2011 exchange rate.
The desired loan size is the size of the loan the borrower initially asks
the lender for. The lender either disperses this loan size or a smaller
one, typically a round fraction of the desired loan size.

2.4. Enforcement crackdown

Starting in 2014, there was an increase in enforcement efforts
targeting the loan shark market. The police force was expanded with
additional funding and law enforcement devoted more efforts to com-
bat the loansharking market. According to the Singapore Police Force
Annual reports, the expenditure on manpower increased by 27.3% from
2012–2013 to 2014–2015 while the number of IML-related crimes fell
by 37.7% over the same period.

In Singapore, unlicensed lending and harassment methods such as
intimidation, vandalism and stalking are illegal, whereas the act of bor-
rowing itself is not illegal. Thus this crackdown was targeted at lenders
and runners (individuals hired by lenders to conduct harassment for
them). From our interviews with ex-lenders, many lenders exited the
market as a result of this crackdown. This includes lenders who were
arrested, as well as those who chose to exit for fear of arrest. Market
insiders claim that the total number of active lenders in Singapore fell
from approximately 1,100 to between 500–1,000 during 2014–2016. In
our own sample, we observe 711 unique lenders before the crackdown,
and 401 lenders afterwards.

Because the enforcement crackdown increased the risk and cost
of conducting harassment, it had several effects on loan contracts.
Table 2 shows the means of the loan-level variables by year. The cartel
responded by raising the nominal interest rate from 20% to 35%. As
a result, borrower loan demand decreased, the total loan volume fell
and loan performance worsened. The increase in missed payments led
lenders to harass borrowers more. These effects of the crackdown also
persist when we control for borrower–lender pair fixed effects and
bilaterial loan history. We show these event study plots in Section A.4
in the Online Appendix.

2.5. Borrowers

Table 3 shows summary statistics for the borrower characteristics
for the subsample of borrowers that we use in estimating our structural
model. We observe several sociodemographic variables, as well as gang
member status and addictions to gambling, drugs, alcohol and visiting
sex workers.

8 We asked the ex-lenders we interviewed to contact 32 borrowers in some
cities in Guangdong, China and 16 borrowers in Johor, Malaysia and these
confirmed that the loan structure that we observe in our setting was identical
in all settings. Therefore this loan structure is not specific to Singapore and is
used in other markets where the syndicates operate.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038945K. Leong et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics of loan-level variables.

Loan size (in S$)
Desired loan size (in S$)
Interest rate (in %)
Number of weeks to repay
Number of missed payments
Number of past loans with lender
Worked for lender to repay
Harassed at least once in loan

N

8836
8836
8836
8836
8836
8836
8547
8836

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Median

1288.56
1600.55
22.28
13.38
3.85
4.10
0.06
0.54

983.28
1018.65
6.48
5.84
3.91
3.43
0.24
0.50

300
300
2
6
0
0
0
0

1000
1000
20
12
2
3
0
1

Max.

5000
5000
50
24
23
19
1
1

The statistics shown are for subsample of data used in estimation.

Table 2
Means of loan-level variables by year.

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Loan size (in S$)
Desired loan size (in S$)
Interest rate (in %)
Number of weeks to repay
Number of missed payments
Number of past loans with lender
Worked for lender to repay
Harassed at least once in loan

1488.51
1701.01
19.33
11.94
2.68
4.27
0.08
0.50

1403.75
1664.55
19.43
12.11
3.01
3.57
0.05
0.46

1456.85
1742.50
19.44
12.06
3.18
3.51
0.04
0.45

1537.84
1838.79
19.48
12.00
3.31
3.62
0.04
0.43

1506.85
1847.72
19.48
13.11
4.15
3.19
0.04
0.48

972.14
1378.89
30.33
15.81
5.34
2.18
0.11
0.81

425.72
910.54
35.31
19.21
7.09
7.44
0.11
0.89

480.43
966.67
38.33
19.68
6.85
4.75
0.12
0.88

The statistics shown are for subsample of data used in estimation.

Table 3
Summary statistics of borrower characteristics.

Age
Post-secondary education
Female
Married
Divorced
Has children
Malaysian
Indian
Current gang member
Previously gang member
Number of previous convictions
Gambles
Drinks alcohol
Uses drugs
Frequents sex workers
Frequently treats friends

N

1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057
1057

Mean

37.56
0.19
0.10
0.49
0.16
0.62
0.14
0.11
0.14
0.30
0.49
0.90
0.97
0.31
0.69
0.09

The statistics shown are for subsample of data used in estimation.

Std. Dev.

Min.

Median

Max.

7.64
0.39
0.30
0.50
0.36
0.49
0.35
0.31
0.35
0.46
1.11
0.29
0.18
0.46
0.46
0.29

20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

38
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0

63
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
6
1
1
1
1
1

The most common reasons borrowers take out loans is for gambling
or buying alcohol or drugs.9 Loan sharks are lenders of last resort, and
all borrowers in our sample stated that they would not be borrowing
from them if they had access to formal sector loans.

Borrowers undertake limited search when choosing a lender. Bor-
rowers return to the same lenders they have borrowed from in the past
86.1% of the time in our data. The borrowers we interviewed stated
that they considered at most one new lender for any loan because on
average all lenders would treat a borrower the same way in the first
loan. This is because all lenders use the same database on borrowers
to estimate their repayment ability. Upon a approaching a lender,
borrowers request an amount to borrow. When the interest rate was
20%, the median requested size was S$1,500, but after interest rates
increased to 35%, this fell to S$1,000. Lenders then decide whether
to lend the requested amount, or to give the borrower a smaller loan.
Lenders typically give out round fractions of the desired loan amount,
such as one half or two thirds. Lenders gave a smaller loan in 40.4% of
cases before the crackdown and 84.9% afterwards.

Borrowers use their own income as the primary source to repay in
84.2% of loans.10 Many borrowers in our data experience fluctuations
in income, as they are mostly self-employed or work for small busi-
nesses. They also may experience fluctuations in expenses each week.
Therefore they often fall short of their loan repayments. The borrowers
we have interviewed told us they never miss payments when they
can afford to, but they may put in additional effort to have cash for
repayment under a greater threat of harassment.

In the survey, we asked borrowers questions to estimate their dis-
count factors, present bias and risk aversion.11 The median borrower
has a weekly discount factor of 𝛿𝑖 = 0.95, corresponding to an annual
factor of 0.069. 99% of the borrowers exhibit present bias, with the
median 𝛽𝑖 with 𝛽𝑖𝛿𝑖 discounting equaling 0.752. This is within the
range of estimates found by Allcott et al. (2022) for payday loan
borrowers. We also estimate that borrowers have a very low degree of
risk aversion. The median estimated coefficient of relative risk aversion
is 𝛾𝑖 = 0.382.

9 We show the reasons borrowers take out loans in Table A.1 in the Online

funds to repay loans.

Appendix.

11 We provide details of this in Section A.5 in the Online Appendix.

10 Table A.3 in the Online Appendix shows borrowers’ primary source of

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038946K. Leong et al.

3. Model

3.1. Overview

We now describe our model which captures the features of this
market described above, starting with an informal overview before
describing it formally.

When approached by a borrower asking for a particular loan size,
the lender chooses whether to disburse the loan, or to give a smaller
loan size. The lender also chooses how harsh to be with the borrower,
which corresponds to a probability of conducting severe harassment
after a missed payment. This harassment is costly to the lender, but
can increase a borrower’s loan repayment efforts because harassment
gives them disutility. The lender uses available information they have
from past loans and other sources to estimate the borrower’s repayment
ability, and chooses the loan size and harshness level to maximize their
expected payoffs, taking into account the loan resetting property and
harassment after missed payments.

When a borrower wants to take out a loan, they decide both how
much to borrow and which lender to borrow from. While all lenders
charge the same interest rate at any given time, lenders differ from
the borrower’s perspective because of differing past loan history with
each lender. Lenders are also heterogeneous in their expected cost of
harassment. Depending on the past loan history and cost of harassment,
certain lenders are more likely to give larger loans or be harsher with
the borrower. In each week of the loan, borrowers generate cash to
make repayments and can increase the amount they have available with
costly effort. Borrowers obtain utility from consumption, which is the
amount they have left after any loan repayments, and obtain disutility
from harassment and effort. Based on the borrower’s expectations over
possible repayment paths and the loan size and harshness level chosen
by each lender, the borrower chooses the lender (or the outside option
of no loan) that gives the highest expected present discounted value of
payoffs.

3.2. Setup

3.2.1. Borrower loan demand and consideration set of lenders

In the market there are  borrowers and  lenders. At each time
period 𝑡, the nominal interest rate 𝑟𝑡 is chosen by the network of
syndicates and all borrowers and lenders take it as given. At time 𝑡,
borrower 𝑖 receives a need to borrow an amount of money. The size of
the loan that the borrower demands is given by the following demand
function:

𝐿⋆

𝑖𝑡 = exp

(𝛼𝑖𝑟𝑡 + 𝜃𝛼

𝑖 + 𝜐𝑖𝑡

)

(1)

The first term, 𝛼𝑖, captures the sensitivity of borrower 𝑖’s loan demand
with respect to the interest rate, 𝑟𝑡. We model this as 𝛼𝑖 = 𝜽𝛼
𝑖 , which
is a linear function of borrower characteristics, 𝒙𝛼
𝑖 . The second term, 𝜃𝛼
𝑖 ,
is a borrower fixed effect for loan demand, and the third term, 𝜐𝑖𝑡, is
a mean-zero normally distributed demand shock. We define the vector
of loan demand parameters as 𝜽𝛼 =

𝑟 ⋅ 𝒙𝛼

)

(

.

𝑟 , {𝜃𝛼
𝜽𝛼

𝑖

}𝑖=
𝑖=1

Borrower 𝑖 at time 𝑡 chooses between a subset of all the lenders
𝑖𝑡 ⊂ {1, … , }, or to not borrow at all.
active in the market, defined by 
We assume that 
𝑖𝑡 contains the last three lenders a borrower borrowed
from, as well as one new lender they have no history with. For these
new lenders, we use the observed network of borrowing and lending.
We describe the process of choosing new lenders formally in Section A.6
in the Online Appendix, but intuitively, the process works as follows. If
two lenders 𝐴 and 𝐵 share a large number of borrowers, they are more
likely to operate nearby and be in the same social network. A borrower
that has borrowed from lender 𝐴 is more likely to be referred to lender
𝐵 by other borrowers, and therefore we add lender 𝐵 to that borrower’s
consideration set.12

3.2.2. Lender choice problem: Loan size and harshness level

If borrower 𝑖 chooses lender 𝓁 ∈ 

𝑖𝑡 and asks for a loan of size 𝐿⋆
𝑖𝑡 ,
lender 𝓁 decides on both the size of the loan to give, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, and how
harsh to be in the loan. Lenders will either disburse the full loan the
borrower asks for, no loan, or a round fraction of it. The set of possible
loan sizes is given by:

L𝑖𝑡 =

{

𝜌𝐿⋆

𝑖𝑡 ∶ 𝜌 ∈

{

0,

1
3

,

1
2

,

2
3

}}

, 1

(2)

can

three

choose

between

harshness

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

The harshness level, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, corresponds to a probability of harassing
)
the borrower after a missed payment, denoted by 𝑝𝜂
. The
𝑖𝓁𝑡
levels:
lender
)
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
 = {𝐿𝑜𝑤, 𝑀𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚, 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ}. The harassment probability 𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡
also depends on the loan size, the borrower’s characteristics and
past loan history with the lender. The harshness level ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 chosen
by the lender can shift this probability up or down. We also allow
for lender heterogeneity in harshness. We denote by 𝑘 (𝓁) ∈  =
{𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟, 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑠ℎ, 𝑉 𝑒𝑟𝑦 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑠ℎ} as lender 𝓁’s type. We classify lenders
into types based on the observed instances of harassment more severe
than verbal threats in the data. Very harsh lenders are the top 10%,
while harsh lenders are in the top 20% but not in the top 10%.

We parameterize this probability as a function of the harshness

level, loan characteristics and borrower characteristics according to:

𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

= 𝛷

(

∑

ℎ∈

1 {ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 = ℎ} 𝜃𝜂

ℎ + 𝜃𝜂

𝑘(𝓁)

+ 𝜃𝜂

𝐿𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 + 𝜽𝜂

𝑥 ⋅ 𝒙𝜂

𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(3)

where 𝛷 (⋅) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard
normal distribution and 𝒙𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡 includes borrower characteristics and past
loan history (such as the number of past loans and missed payments
on the last loan). To account for lenders only observing some borrower
characteristics after the first loan, such as addictions, we also include
interactions of having a past loan history with these characteristics in
𝒙𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡. In Section A.10 in the Online Appendix we show that our results
are not sensitive to this assumption. We obtain very similar results from
our counterfactual experiments if we instead assume that lenders know
all of these characteristics from the first loan.

We assume that the lender communicates its choice to the borrower
and commits to it because they have a reputation to maintain. We make
this assumption because our data do not track loans across weeks. We
observe if harassment occurs in a loan, but we do not observe the
week of the loan where the harassment took place. This probability
is the probability with which the lender harasses the borrower every
time a borrower misses a payment except in the instance where the
borrower has missed two payments in a row. According to standard
practice in the market, we assume that the lender conducts severe
harassment with probability one in this case. For example, if a borrower
misses their payments in weeks 3, 4 and 6, the harassment probability
is 𝑝𝑖𝓁𝑡
in weeks 3 and 6 but 1 in week 4. We define the vector
ℎ∈ , {𝜃𝜂
of harassment parameters 𝜽𝜂 =

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑘∈ , 𝜃𝜂

({𝜃𝜂

𝐿, 𝜽𝜂

)

}

}

)

ℎ

𝑥

𝑘

.

3.2.3. Borrower income process and moral hazard

An important component of the expected payoffs in a loan for both
borrowers and lenders is the probability that the borrower makes the
weekly payments. This determines how often a loan is reset and how
much harassment will take place.

Borrowers generate cash 𝑚𝑖0𝑡𝑤 each week 𝑤, which they can use
for consumption and loan repayments. We assume this is generated
according to a truncated normal distribution:
where 𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤 ∼  (

0, 𝑚𝑖0𝑡 + 𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤

𝑚𝑖0𝑡𝑤 = max

(4)

{

}

)

0, 𝜎2
𝑖

12 In estimation, we do not observe the last three lenders a borrower
borrowed from for the first two lenders they visited in our data. In these cases,

we take the first three lenders they borrowed from that we observe in our data.
For the 7% of borrowers that do not have a history with three lenders in our
data, we add additional new lenders using the network approach so that all
borrowers have exactly four lenders in their consideration sets.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038947K. Leong et al.

Borrowers generate a fixed amount 𝑚𝑖0𝑡 plus a stochastic component
𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤. We model 𝑚𝑖0𝑡 as 𝑚𝑖0𝑡 = ̄𝑦𝑖+𝜽𝑚
0 ⋅𝒙0
𝑖𝑡, where ̄𝑦𝑖 is the borrower’s stated
average weekly income and 𝒙0
𝑖𝑡 includes borrower characteristics, such
as demographics and addictions. We model the standard deviation of
income shocks as 𝜎𝑖 = 1 + 𝜃𝜎 𝐺𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑖 to allow the variance of the cash
available for repayments to be different for gamblers and non-gamblers.
During the course of a loan, borrowers can increase the amount they
have available for loan repayments each week through costly effort. For
example, by working additional hours or reducing discretionary con-
sumption. This moral hazard component in borrower repayment may
be affected by the lender’s harshness choice and other characteristics.
We model the additional fixed amount the borrower generates each
week to be a linear function of these variables, similar to Einav et al.
(2012, 2013). More specifically, if borrower 𝑖 has a loan with lender
𝓁 using a harshness level ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, they increase the fixed component
)
generated each week from 𝑚𝑖0𝑡 to 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡
, resulting in a total amount
generated each week of:

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

= max

{

0, 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

+ 𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤

}

)

0, 𝜎2
𝑖

(5)

We model the fixed component 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑖𝑡 + 𝜃𝑚

𝜂 𝑝𝜂

𝑖𝓁𝑡

= ̄𝑦𝑖 + 𝜽𝑚
𝑒 ⋅ 𝒙𝑒
𝜽𝑚

0 ⋅ 𝒙0
𝑖𝓁𝑡 + 𝜃𝑚

where 𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤 ∼  (
)

as:

)

+ 𝜃𝑚
𝑟

)
(𝑟𝑡 − 0.2

+

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

0 ⋅𝒙0
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑘(𝓁)
Each week the borrower generates, 𝑚𝑖0𝑡 = ̄𝑦𝑖 +𝜽𝑚
𝑖𝑡, plus the additional
amount due to effort. We do not restrict 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡
to be larger than
𝑚𝑖0𝑡 as higher interest rates could reduce effort.13 This amount is mod-
)
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
eled as a linear function of the harassment probability, 𝑝𝜂
,
𝑖𝓁𝑡
increases of the interest rate above the baseline 20%, additional covari-
ates, 𝑥𝑒
𝑖𝓁𝑡, and the lender’s type, 𝑘 (𝓁). This includes a flexible functional
form for the number of past loans with the lender, the number of missed
payments in their last loan, and the borrower’s present bias and risk
aversion. We define the vector of parameters related to the borrower
income process as 𝜽𝑚 =
𝑟 , 𝜃𝑚
Exerting effort is costly for the borrower. We assume a unit cost of
effort 𝜃𝛹 and do not allow for negative effort costs. The total effort cost
is then
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(
𝜽𝑚
0 , 𝜃𝑚

{𝜃𝛹 [𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑒 , {𝜃𝑚

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

}
] , 0

𝜂 , 𝜃𝑚

− 𝑚𝑖0𝑡

= max

𝛹𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑘∈

(7)

)

}

)

)

𝑘

.

from increasing the fixed component in the income process from 𝑚𝑖0𝑡
to 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)
.

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

With a loan of size 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, the borrower must make weekly repayments
of 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 throughout the course of the loan. The borrower can only
) ≥ 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, as lenders do not accept partial
make a payment if 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
payments. Although we assume borrowers exhibit moral hazard in their
effort of generating cash for repayments, in line with our evidence that
we discuss below, we assume borrowers never strategically default on
a payment. Thus, they will always make a payment if they can afford
it. The probability that the borrower can make a payment in any week
is therefore given by:
(

)

𝑝𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

= 𝛷

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

− 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
𝜎𝑖

(8)

For a given loan size, an increase in the interest decreases the repay-
ment probability in two ways. First, there is the mechanical effect that
the weekly repayment, 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, is larger. Second, there is the moral haz-
)
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
ard effect which, as we will find, has a negative impact on 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡
.
Thus even if loan demand decreases following an increase in the
interest rate that keeps 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 the same, the repayment probability can
decrease through the moral hazard effect, which depends on the unit
cost of credit.

3.3. Lender’s optimal choice of loan size and harshness

3.3.1. Lender’s estimate of repayment probability

Before a lender has interacted with a borrower, we assume they do
not observe their addictions, discounting, risk aversion, gang affiliation
or prior convictions. We assume they only learn these characteristics
after they have had a loan with the borrower in the past. We define
)
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
analogous components of the borrower income process ̃𝑚𝑖0𝑡, ̃𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡
and ̃𝜎𝑖 as the lender’s estimates of 𝑚𝑖0𝑡, 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡
and 𝜎𝑖, respectively,
where they only use information available to them at the time. Thus we
replace the addiction, gang affiliation and prior conviction variables
with interactions of the respective variables with having a past loan
history, in addition to an indicator for having no history. For example,
we model the lender’s estimate of 𝜎𝑖 as:
}
ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡,01 {ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝓁𝑡 = 0
̃𝜎𝑖 = 1 + 𝜃̃𝜎

𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑟1 {ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝓁𝑡 > 0

} 𝐺𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑖

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

+ 𝜃̃𝜎

)

We combine all parameters relating to the lender’s estimate of the
borrower income process as 𝜽 ̃𝑚 =
and 𝜽̃𝜎 =
(

𝜂 , 𝜃 ̃𝑚
. Given this, the lender’s estimate of the borrower’s cash

𝑒 , {𝜃 ̃𝑚

𝜽 ̃𝑚
0 , 𝜃 ̃𝑚

𝑟 , 𝜃 ̃𝑚

, 𝜃̃𝜎

})

𝑘∈

)

(

𝜃̃𝜎
ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡,0

𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑟

available for repayments process is given by:

̃𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

= max

{

0, ̃𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

+ ̃𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤

}

where ̃𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤 ∼  (

0, ̃𝜎2
𝑖

)

(9)

(6)

The lender’s estimate of the borrower’s repayment probability is then
given by:

𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

= 𝛷

(

̃𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
̃𝜎𝑖

)

− 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

3.3.2. Lender’s expected payoffs from a loan

(10)

We now describe the lenders’ expected payoffs from a loan of a
given size and harshness level, and then discuss their optimal choice.
If the lender originates a loan of size 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 with harshness level ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 to
the borrower, in week 1 their payoff from the loan is the cash outflow
from disbursing the loan:
) 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

(11)
) 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 instead of 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 is
The reason the lender only disburses
because the lender keeps the first payment at the moment of disbursing
the loan.

(
1 − 𝑟𝑡

(
1 − 𝑟𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

̃𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡1

= −

)

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

In the second week, the lender estimates that the borrower will
)
make the payment with probability 𝑝 ̃𝑚
. If the borrower
𝑖𝓁𝑡
makes the payment, the lender receives a cash inflow of 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, but if
they miss the payment, the lender conducts harassment with probabil-
ity 𝑝𝜂
at an expected cost and disutility, 𝜅𝓁𝑡. This expected
𝑖𝓁𝑡
cost includes the expected cost of paying runners to conduct harass-
ment, 𝑐𝓁𝑡, the probability of arrest from harassing, 𝑝𝑒
𝓁𝑡, and the expected
disutility from arrest, 𝐾𝓁𝑡:
𝜅𝓁𝑡 = 𝑐𝓁𝑡 + 𝑝𝑒

(12)

)

𝓁𝑡𝐾𝓁𝑡

Taken together, the expected payoff in week 2 is given by:
E [̃𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡2
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
1 − 𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

) 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

=𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡
[

𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]

)]

−

) 𝜅𝓁𝑡

(13)

We allow the harassment cost to vary after the crackdown, and also to
vary by lender type. We parameterize it as:

𝜅𝓁𝑡 =

(
1 + 𝜃𝜅

𝑘(𝓁)

) (

𝜃𝜅
0 + 𝜃𝜅

𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡

)

(14)

(

where 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 ∈ {0, 1} is a post-crackdown indicator. We group these
parameters into 𝜽𝜅 =
𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡, {𝜃𝜅 }𝑘∈
𝑘 = 1
for regular lenders. In estimation, we do not separately identify the
monetary cost of harassment from the expected disutility from arrest.
Instead, we estimate the sum of these costs.

, where we normalize 𝜃𝜅

, 𝜃𝜅

𝜃𝜅
0

)

13 At our estimated parameters, however, 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) > 𝑚𝑖0𝑡 for 86.2% of

observations.

In the following weeks the lender’s payoff depends on the number
of consecutive payments the borrower has made up to that point. To

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038948K. Leong et al.

define the lender’s payoff in each possible case, we define the payment
counter 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 as the number of consecutive payments made before week
𝑤. When a borrower misses a payment in week 𝑤, 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤+1 resets to zero.
Using this, we can define the lender’s expected payoff in each possible
case for weeks 𝑤 ∈ {2, … , 𝑊 − 1} before the terminal week 𝑊 as:

̃𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

=

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) ≥ 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
) < 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

(15)

) < 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
) 𝜅𝓁𝑡

if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 < 6 and ̃𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 = 0 and ̃𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 ∈ {1, … , 5} and
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
̃𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 = 6

⎧
𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
⎪
−𝜅𝓁𝑡 + 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
⎪
(𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 − 1
⎪
−
⎨
−𝑝𝜂
⎪
𝑖𝓁𝑡
⎪
0
⎪
⎩
In the first case, the loan is not fully repaid (𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 < 6), the borrower
makes the payment and the lender receives 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡. In the second case,
the borrower has missed two payments in a row and the lender harasses
the borrower with probability one. The borrower is required to come up
with the penalty by the end of the week. In the third case, the borrower
) 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 back to
misses a payment and the lender must return
)
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
the borrower. They inflict harassment with probability 𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡
at an expected cost 𝜅𝓁𝑡. In the final case, the loan is already fully repaid
(𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 = 6) and there are no more cashflows between the borrower and
lender.

(𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 − 1

In the rarer case that the loan is still unpaid by the terminal week
𝑊 = 24, the lender will make the borrower do work for them to
finish paying off the loan. We assume the terminal week is the 24th
week because 89.7% of loans are repaid within this timeframe, closely
matching the 8.7% rate at which borrowers are made work for the
lender when loans are unpaid after many months. We assume that in
expectation the value of this work equals the remaining amount due on
the loan. We define these payoffs exactly in Section A.7.1 in the Online
Appendix.

The lender discounts future weeks with a weekly discount factor of
̃𝛿. The expected present discounted value of disbursing a loan of size
𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 with harshness level ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 is then:
[ 𝑊
∑

]
)

̃𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

= −

(
1 − 𝑟𝑡

) 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 + E

̃𝛿𝑤−1̃𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑤=2

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(16)

where ̃𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡
and harshness level that is private information to the lender.

is a lender payoff shock specific to the loan size

+ ̃𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡
)

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

3.3.3. Lender’s choice of loan size and harshness level

We assume a nested logit structure for the lender’s choice problem,
where the upper nest is the loan size and the lower nests are the
harshness levels. If the lender chooses a loan size of zero, there is no
lower nest. For the sake of notation, we assume the lender uses the
‘‘Low’’ harshness level in this case. We denote by 𝑝𝐿ℎ
the
𝑖𝓁𝑡
nested logit probabilities that the lender chooses loan size 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 ∈ L𝑖𝑡
and harshness level ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 ∈  before the realizations of the payoff shocks
)
̃𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡
. For positive loan sizes, the probability that the lender
is given by
chooses the combination

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

)

𝑝𝐿ℎ
𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
(
̃
𝑉 𝑖𝓁𝑡

exp

=
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

)

∕𝜆𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡)

∑

𝑖𝓁𝑡∈ exp
ℎ′

̃
𝑉 𝑖𝓁𝑡

(

(

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ′
𝑖𝓁𝑡
(

exp

𝜆𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡) log

(

) ×

(

̃
𝑉 𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

∕𝜆𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡)

∑

𝑖𝓁𝑡∈ exp
ℎ′
(

∑

1 + ∑

𝑖𝓁𝑡∈L𝑖𝑡⧵{0} exp
𝐿′

𝜆𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡(𝐿′

𝑖𝓁𝑡) log

ℎ′∈ exp

̃
𝑉 𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿′

𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ′

𝑖𝓁𝑡

)))

)

∕𝜆𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡)

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ′
(

𝑖𝓁𝑡

)))

)

∕𝜆𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡(𝐿′

𝑖𝓁𝑡)

(17)

)

̃
𝑉 𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
is the choice-
where
)
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
specific value without the payoff shock and the function 𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡
indexes the elements of L𝑖𝑡 ⧵{0}.14 We group the terms 𝜆𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡) into 𝜽𝜆.

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

= ̃𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡

− ̃𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

)

3.4. Borrower’s optimal choice of lender

We now describe the expected payoffs for borrower 𝑖 from a loan
of size 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 and harshness level ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 with lender 𝓁 at time 𝑡. We then
discuss the borrower’s optimal choice of lender.

3.4.1. Borrower’s expected payoffs given loan size and harshness level

(
1 − 𝑟𝑡

In the first week, the borrower consumes their available cash 𝑚𝑖0𝑡1
) 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡. The borrower does not put in extra
and the disbursed loan
effort to raise cash in the first week because the first payment is already
taken out of the initial loan size by the lender. We assume the borrower
takes out the loan before the weekly cash shock 𝜈𝑖𝑡𝑤 is realized. We
further assume borrowers have constant relative risk aversion utility
over consumption each week, where borrower 𝑖’s coefficient of relative
risk aversion is 𝛾𝑖. The borrower’s expected utility in week 1 is then:

E [𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡1

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]

= E

[ [𝑚𝑖0𝑡1 +

(
1 − 𝑟𝑡

) 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

]1−𝛾𝑖 − 1

]

1 − 𝛾𝑖

(18)

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

In week 2, the borrower is able to make the repayment with probability
)
𝑝𝑚
. If the borrower misses the payment, the borrower will
𝑖𝓁𝑡
)
be harassed by the lender with probability 𝑝𝜂
, which gives
𝑖𝓁𝑡
the borrower disutility 𝜒𝓁. We parameterize this as 𝜒𝓁 = 𝜃𝜒
𝑘(𝓁) to
allow different lender types to give different harassment disutilities. We
denote 𝜽𝜒 =

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

}

{𝜃𝜒
𝑘

𝑘∈.

The expected payoff in week 2 from the loan is then:
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]

)

E [𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡2

= −𝛹𝑖𝓁𝑡
[ [𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡2

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

+

[𝑝𝑚

𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)] E

+

[
1 − 𝑝𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]

(

E

[ [𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡2

− 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
1 − 𝛾𝑖
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
1 − 𝛾𝑖

)]1−𝛾𝑖 − 1

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

− 𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) 𝜒𝓁

)

]1−𝛾𝑖 − 1

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡2

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) ≥ 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

]

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡2

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) < 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

]

(19)

Because IML borrowing is legal for borrowers, there is no arrest prob-
ability. In the following weeks, the payoff depends on the number of
consecutive payments made before week 𝑤, 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤. We can define the
borrower’s expected payoff in each possible case for all weeks 𝑤 ∈
{2, … , 𝑊 − 1} as:

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) ≥ 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

]

|
|
|
|

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]

=

[𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡)−𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡]1−𝛾𝑖 −1
1−𝛾𝑖

)

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
− 𝜒𝓁 − 𝛹𝑖𝓁𝑡
[

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 − 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

)

E [𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
[

E

−𝛹𝑖𝓁𝑡
− 1
1−𝛾𝑖
−𝜃𝛹 E
[

E

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

]

) < 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) < 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

]

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)|
|
|

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
|
|
|
|
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
)

[𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡)+(𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤−1)𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡]1−𝛾𝑖 −1
1−𝛾𝑖

) 𝜒𝓁 − 𝛹𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
]

−𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡
[
[𝑚𝑖0𝑡𝑤]1−𝛾𝑖 −1
1−𝛾𝑖

E

) ≥ 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 < 6 and
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 = 0 and
(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

) < 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 ∈ {1, … , 5}

and 𝑚𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

(ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

) < 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

if 𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 = 6

(20)

14 For example, 𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

( 1
3

𝐿⋆
𝑖𝑡

= 1 and 𝑔𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(𝐿⋆

𝑖𝑡

that
∑

the lender chooses to give no loan is then: 𝑝𝐿ℎ
)

where we note that 𝑝𝐿ℎ

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡∈ 𝑝𝐿ℎ

𝑖𝓁𝑡

∑

= 4. The probability
𝑖𝓁𝑡 (0, 𝐿𝑜𝑤) = 1 −
𝑖𝓁𝑡 (0, 𝑀𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚) =

𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡∈L𝑖𝑡⧵{0}
𝑝𝐿ℎ
𝑖𝓁𝑡 (0, 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ) = 0.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)1038949K. Leong et al.

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝑛𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤 − 1

In the first case, the borrower is able to make the payment and
consumes their remaining income. In the second case, the borrower has
missed two payments in a row and is harassed with probability one.
They are required to pay the financial penalty by the end of the week
and use costly effort to make up for the shortfall. In the third case, the
) 𝑟𝑡𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 to
borrower misses a payment and the lender returns
them and resets the loan. The borrower also is harassed with probability
)
𝑝𝜂
. In the final case, the loan is already fully repaid and the
𝑖𝓁𝑡
borrower consumes their entire available cash, 𝑚𝑖0𝑡𝑤, from that week.
If the loan is unpaid upon reaching the terminal week 𝑊 , the
borrower must work for the lender. This gives the borrower disutility
because the lender requires them to complete undesirable tasks. Bor-
rowers we have interviewed stated the expected disutility from this is
between 8–10 times the expected disutility from missing a payment,
and the expected level of disutility from this depends on the amount
outstanding on the loan. We specify the exact terminal week payoffs of
the borrower in Section A.7.2 in the Online Appendix in order to match
the borrower’s responses from the interviews. We note that because the
majority of borrowers in our sample discount the future very heavily
(the median borrower in our sample values $1 in one year at 6.5 cents
today), the specification of the terminal week payoffs does not have
a large impact on the borrowers’ expected present discounted payoffs
from loans.

Borrowers discount payoffs in future weeks with quasi-hyperbolic
discounting. Borrower 𝑖 discounts expected payoffs 𝑤 weeks in the
future with a discount factor 𝛽𝑖𝛿𝑤
𝑖 . The expected present discounted
value of a loan of size 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 and harshness level ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 from lender 𝓁 is
then:

𝑣𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

= E

[

𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡1

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

+

𝑊
∑

𝑤=2

𝛽𝑖𝛿𝑤−1
𝑖

𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

]
)

(21)

3.4.2. Borrower lender choice probabilities

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

The borrower does not observe the value of the lender’s payoff
)
shocks, ̃𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡
. Therefore, when a borrower is choosing a
lender, they are uncertain about the loan size they will receive and
the harshness level that the lender will choose. However, borrowers
(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
know the probabilities 𝑝𝐿ℎ
of the lender choosing each
𝑖𝓁𝑡
combination. These probabilities depend on the borrower’s past history
and performance with the lender, as well as the lender’s harshness type,
which makes the lenders differentiated from the borrower’s perspective.
The expected present discounted payoff of choosing lender 𝓁 is then:
) 𝑣𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡 =

+ 𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡

(22)

∑

∑

)

)

𝑝𝐿ℎ
𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡∈L𝑖𝑡

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡∈

where 𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡 is a Type I extreme value borrower–lender-time-specific
match value shock. If the borrower chooses the outside option of not
taking out a loan, they consume their weekly available cash, 𝑚𝑖0𝑡𝑤, each
week. The expected presented discounted value of payoffs from this
option is then:

𝑉𝑖0𝑡 = E

𝑚1−𝛾𝑖

𝑖0𝑡1 − 1
1 − 𝛾𝑖

+

𝑊
∑

𝑤=2

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝛽𝑖𝛿𝑤−1
𝑖

𝑚1−𝛾𝑖

𝑖0𝑡𝑤 − 1
1 − 𝛾𝑖

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

+ 𝜀𝑖0𝑡

(23)

where 𝜀𝑖0𝑡 is a Type I extreme value shock to the match value of the
outside option.

The borrower chooses the lender or outside option which maximizes
their payoff. Let ̄𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡 and ̄𝑉𝑖0𝑡 be the expected present discounted value
of choosing lender 𝓁 and the outside option respectively excluding the
match value shocks, 𝜀𝑖𝓁𝑡 and 𝜀𝑖0𝑡. Before the realization of the match
value shock, the probability of choosing lender 𝓁 is then given by:

(

)

Pr

𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡 >

max
𝓁′∈{0}∪𝑖𝑡⧵{𝓁}

𝑉𝑖𝓁′𝑡

=

∑

exp

( ̄𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡
exp

)
( ̄𝑉𝑖𝓁′𝑡

𝓁′∈{0}∪𝑖𝑡

)

(24)

3.5. Discussion of modeling assumptions

In this section we present evidence from our data and interviews we
have carried out to justify the modeling assumptions we make above.

3.5.1. The cartel of loan shark syndicates

This market features very limited competition between lenders,
which explains why we do not explicitly incorporate it into our model.
There are three main reasons that support this modeling strategy. First,
as described in Section Section 2.2, the syndicates that control the
market and hire the lenders coordinate on several margins, imposing
to all lenders the same interest rate and loan structure, including the
maturity, financial penalties for missed payments, similar harassment
methods, and no collateral requirement. Moreover, the syndicates guar-
antee each of their lenders a monopoly in the geographic area where
they operate, aimed at preventing conflicts between lenders that would
attract the attention of law enforcement. This form of cartel-like agree-
ments is a typical feature of illicit market products. Allard (2019) writes
that ‘‘the crime network is also less prone to uncontrolled outbreaks
of internecine violence . . . The money is so big that long-standing,
blood-soaked rivalries among Asian crime groups have been set aside
in a united pursuit of gargantuan profits’’. Second, as discussed in
Section 2.5, borrowers often return to the same lenders they borrowed
from in the past, which implies that poaching borrowers from each
other is not common practice among lenders. Third, lenders are not
cash constrained and their harassment methods ensure that borrowers
always repay, so they have little incentive to reject borrowers that
approach them. This also limits borrowers’ search among lenders,
therefore reducing the size of their consideration set and the extent of
competition.

Additionally, the IML market does not compete with legal mon-
eylenders in our setting. The formal sector interest rate is capped at
4% per month which implies an APR of 48%, less than one quarter
of the pre-crackdown IML APR of 209%. Borrowers with access to the
formal sector would have no incentive to borrow from loan sharks, and,
as documented above, the borrowers in our sample did not have access
to formal-sector loans.

We also do not model lenders choosing the interest rate they charge
to borrowers or engaging in any form of price discrimination. The
cartel of loan shark syndicates advised lenders on the rate they should
charge to all borrowers at any given time. In our data, 88% of loans
had a nominal rate of 20% before the crackdown in 2014. After 2015,
89.6% of loans had a nominal rate of 35%. Because almost all lenders
charge the same interest rate at any given time, we assume lenders
take the prevailing interest rate as given in our model. Soudijn and
Zhang (2013), who document the activities of a Chinese loan shark
using a seized ledger from a Dutch casino, also document a lack of price
discrimination. Because we only observe two interest-rate regimes in
our data, we do not model cartel interest-rate setting in our baseline
model. However, we explore optimal cartel interest-rate setting before
and after the crackdown in Section 6.1.2.

3.5.2. Lenders

Our model assumes that lenders are not cash constrained and choose
how much to lend to a borrower, instead of which borrowers to lend to.
Actively-trading lenders make large profits as there is very little default,
high interest rates, and high revenue from missed payment penalties.
From our interviews, we learned that lenders are always searching for
new borrowers to lend to. The average lender will typically start with
S$50,000 in cash from the syndicate to lend out for a day. If they lend
out all of the cash before the end of the day, they can obtain additional
cash within thirty minutes.

Our model further assumes that lenders have no fixed costs of
lending to a particular borrower. For each individual loan, we consider
the lender’s fixed costs as sunk. While there are very few loans for less
than S$300 in our sample, lenders are still willing to give out small

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389410K. Leong et al.

loans. There are a small number of S$100 loans in our sample, and we
also tried to take out a loan for S$150 ourselves and were able to do so.
This is evidence that lenders do not have an economically significant
fixed cost per loan.

3.5.3. Borrowers

Our model assumes that borrowers choose between three past
lenders and one new lender when they want to take out a loan. We
assume borrowers undertake limited search for new lenders because
all the borrowers in our dataset stated that they considered less than
or equal to one new lender for all transactions. This assumption is
consistent with the high persistence in borrowers’ choice of lenders
that we observe in our data, where only 15% of loans were taken with
a new lender. While this persistence suggests that modeling the first
choice of lender, similarly to Crawford et al. (2018), is important, the
nature of our data prevents us to do so. First, we do not observe the
first lender chosen by our borrowers, as all of them were already in the
IML market before the start of our survey. Second, even if we were to
focus on instances where existing borrowers switch to a new lender,
having only 15% of the observations would raise issues of statistical
power for our estimation, and of sample selection for our estimation
and counterfactuals.

Our model assumes that borrowers ask lenders for the amount they
desire and do not inflate it because they think a lender will only give
them half of what they ask for. The borrowers we have interviewed
stated they had little incentive to ask for a larger amount, mainly for
two reasons. First, lenders ultimately decide whether to lend at each
loan size and asking for a larger amount will not alter their decision.
Second, if the lender gave them an amount larger than what they
desired, they would have greater difficulty repaying it.

During a loan, borrowers typically use their own income to make re-
payments. Table A.3 in the Online Appendix shows the primary source
of funds borrowers used to repay loans in our survey. In 84.2% of loans
they used their own income as the primary source, whereas borrowing
from colleagues and friends (4.2%), family (2.3%) or another loan
shark (1.6%) to be able to repay is much less common. In our model,
for reasons such as the threat of harassment, they expend effort to have
additional cash available for repayments.

Because it is less common, we do not model borrowers choosing
to borrow from friends, family or other lenders to repay existing loans.
Borrowers sometimes use a part of new loans to help repay part of their
existing loans, but it is generally not the primary reason they take out a
loan. Table A.1 in the Online Appendix shows that 34.3% of borrowers
stated that they used part of the loan to repay an existing lender, but
this was the primary reason for only 9.1% of loans. Table 2 in Lang et al.
(2022) also reports borrowers using other loans to help repay existing
loans. However, they report an aggregation of all sources used to repay
and not the primary source, which is why all sources taken together add
up to much more than 100%. The reason borrowers do not take out
loans with the primary purpose of repaying existing loans is because
lenders may share information on borrowers to improve their joint
profitability. If a borrower wanted to take out a loan from one lender
to repay another, the new lender may already have the information
on the borrower’s debt and reject their loan request. In our model we
therefore assume that borrowers cannot take out another loan to repay
an existing one.

We assume borrowers always make a repayment when they can
afford to. Because of the threat of harassment, together with the fact
that lenders almost always get the loans repaid eventually, borrowers
exert effort to make repayments and almost always make a repayment
when they can afford to. Borrowers we have interviewed have also
told us that if a lender ever discovered that a borrower chose not to
pay when they could afford to (for example, because they had a good
gambling win), then the lender would use extra harassment methods to
punish the borrower. Lenders often have contacts stationed in different
areas where people gamble and would know if their borrowers had

a good gambling win. Our model estimates show that the median
borrower would need to be compensated with at least S$2,599.91 to
accept lenders’ harassment. Even with the model’s average harassment
probability of 21.9%, and ignoring that the loan will reset, the median
borrower is still better off making the weekly repayment of S$200 at the
median loan size. Therefore, in our model we assume that borrowers
will always make a loan repayment when they have enough cash
available to do so. The borrowers we have interviewed also stated that
borrowers do not report lenders to the authorities when they cannot
repay. This is because lenders would seek revenge on the borrower
which would be much more severe than the harassment from a missed
payment. Reporting a lender would also exclude the borrower from
future loans, as this information would be shared between lenders.

Our model assumes that borrowers do not save money across weeks.
All borrowers in our sample stated they have zero savings that they
can withdraw. They said that if they had savings, they would not be
borrowing from loan sharks. Only 54 of the 1,090 borrowers stated they
would save some of their money from windfall income. Therefore in our
modeling, we assume that borrowers do not save the money lenders
return to them when they miss a payment and the loan resets.

Due to the large fraction of impatient and present biased borrowers,
we refrain from modeling any dynamic consideration of borrowers
beyond their current loan. This implies that borrowers, when repaying
a loan, do not consider the larger loan they could get in the future
from the same lender if they were to perform well on the current
loan. Because the median borrower values the payoff of a loan in
one year at only 6.5% of the same loan today, we argue that the
dynamic strategic incentives for borrowers are minimal. According to
our model estimates, the average borrower would obtain a higher
surplus of S$0.69 per week during a loan from having missed one fewer
payment with all of their past lenders when deciding to take out a loan.
This low return, together with the high rate of discounting and present
bias, implies that incorporating dynamic incentives in borrower effort
and lender choice would likely have negligible effects on borrower
behavior. Therefore we argue it would not impact our main results.

Finally, our modeling of the borrower’s choice of lender is a complex
dynamic problem. We use this formulation which takes into account the
specific loan structure in our setting for the following reasons. First,
the borrowers in our sample are very experienced and understand the
structure of loans. In our surveys we asked borrowers mathematical
questions about the loan structure and only 2 of the 1,090 borrowers
answered questions incorrectly. This is evidence that the borrowers are
not cognitively impaired. This is similar to a result found by Carvalho
et al. (2016), who find that among low-income households, financial
strain does not impede cognitive function, nor worsens the quality of
decision-making. Furthermore, 93% of the borrowers in our sample
stated that they have talked to others to obtain advice about borrowing.
Therefore we argue that on average borrowers are able to compute the
expected payoffs from a lender. Second, although we model the choice
of lender as a rational problem, the extremely low discount factors
and high degree of present bias in most borrowers lead borrowers to
weight the initial utility of receiving the loan much higher than the
following repayments and harassment. Thus our framework is able
to rationalize decisions that are not dynamically consistent. Third,
in order to analyze the effects of law enforcement interventions, we
want to be able to decompose how changes in interest payments and
harassment contribute to welfare changes within the structure of loans
in the market.

4. Estimation

The full vector of parameters to be estimated is given by:
𝜽𝜂, 𝜽 ̃𝑚, 𝜽̃𝜎, 𝜽𝜅 , 𝜽𝜆, 𝜽𝛼, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝜽𝜒 , 𝜃𝛹 )
(

𝜽 =

(25)

We estimate 𝜽 in a series of steps. We first jointly estimate all param-
eters related to the lender’s problem, which are given by 𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 =

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389411K. Leong et al.

(

𝜽𝜂, 𝜽 ̃𝑚, 𝜽̃𝜎, 𝜽𝜅 , 𝜽𝜆)
. We then estimate the remaining parameters related
to the borrowers in three further steps. We describe each of these steps
in turn.

4.1. Estimation of lender parameters

To identify the harassment probability parameters, 𝜽𝜂, we use ob-
served harassment events in our data given the observed number of
missed payments. We denote by h𝑖𝓁𝑡 ∈ {0, 1} whether severe harassment
was used in a loan. In our data, we observe if harassment was used
at the loan level, but we observe neither the exact number of times
harassment was used nor its timing. For example, for a loan with
three missed payments, we may observe if the lender splashed paint
on the borrower’s home and harassed a family member. However, we
do not observe if these were used for different missed payments, or if
they were both used at the same time in response to a single missed
payment. We also do not observe how many times a single form of
harassment was used in a loan. Therefore we only use if harassment
was used at least once to identify 𝜽𝜂.

To identify the repayment probability parameters from the lender’s
perspective, 𝜽 ̃𝑚 and 𝜽̃𝜎 , we use the observed total number of weeks to
repay, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, the total number of missed payments, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, and whether the
borrower reached the terminal week, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡 ∈ {0, 1}. This is because we
do not observe the specific weeks in which missed payments occurred
in our data.

Finally, to identify the lender harassment cost parameters, 𝜽𝜅 , and
the nested logit parameters, 𝜽𝜆, we use variation in the observed
loan sizes in the data. A higher harassment cost leads lenders to be
more likely to choose smaller loans for a given repayment ability and
harshness level, as they will need to harass borrowers more often to
ensure they repay.

We now discuss the likelihood function that we use to jointly
estimate the parameters 𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟. We do not observe the harshness level,
ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, chosen by the lender (we only observe if harassment occurs).
Therefore we integrate it out of our likelihood:

(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

Pr

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )
|
|
|

=

∑

Pr

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡∈

(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|
|

)

× Pr

(

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

|
|
|

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 ) (26)

The first term in the sum can be re-written as:

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|
|

)

)

(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡
(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡
(
𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

|
|
|

Pr

Pr

Pr

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|
|

)

× Pr

=

×
(
𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|
|

(27)

Combining Eqs. (26) and (27), the contribution of loan (𝑖, 𝓁, 𝑡) to the
likelihood can be written as:

(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

Pr

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )

=

|
|
|

)

(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡

∑

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡∈

× Pr

|
|
|

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

Pr
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Harassment Likelihood
𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(
𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

|
|
|
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Loan Performance Likelihood
(
ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(
𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

)

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|
|

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )
|
Pr
|
|
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Harashness Level Probabilities

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Loan Size Likelihood

× Pr

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

time to repay and number of missed payments. In our model, if a
borrower misses one payment, the lender will harass the borrower with
)
probability 𝑝𝜂
. If the borrower misses two payments
𝑖𝓁𝑡
in two consecutive weeks, the lender will harass the borrower with
probability one after the second missed payment. For example, a loan
with missed payments in weeks 2 and 3 has harassment in week 2 with
probability 𝑝𝜂
and in week 3 with probability 1.
𝑖𝓁𝑡
On the contrary, a loan with missed payments in weeks 2 and 4 has
harassment with probability 𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

in both weeks.

)

)

We use the number of missed payments combined with the number
of possible ways a loan can have two consecutive missed payments
given the time taken to repay to estimate the harassment probability.
The probability of harassment occurring at least once given 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡,
𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡 and ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡 is given by:

Pr

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

=

(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡 = 1 |
|
|
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

1 − 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(

𝑑

̂̂𝐶
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

+

+ 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡
̂̂𝐶
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

+

(

𝐶 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡
̂̂𝐶
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

−

) (

1 −

[

1 − 𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡 )

𝐶 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

(

𝐶 𝑑
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑑

̂̂𝐶
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

−

) (

1 −

[

1 − 𝑝𝜂
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡 )

𝐶 𝑑
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(29)

𝑓 and

𝑤
̂̂𝐶
𝑓 , 𝐶 𝑑

𝑑
̂̂𝐶
𝑓 are defined as follows. First, 𝐶 𝑤

The terms 𝐶 𝑤
𝑓 is
𝑓 ,
the number of ways (possible paths of missing and making payments)
through which a loan can finish in 𝑤 weeks with 𝑓 missed payments.
𝑤
̂̂𝐶
Second,
𝑓 is the number of ways a loan can have two missed payments
in a row when finishing in 𝑤 weeks with 𝑓 missed payments. Third,
𝐶 𝑑
𝑓 is the number of ways a loan can reach the terminal week with 𝑓

𝑑
̂̂𝐶
missed payments. Finally,
𝑓 is the number of ways a loan can have
two missed payments in a row when reaching the terminal week with 𝑓
missed payments. We provide example cases of this formula in Section
A.8 in the Online Appendix.

The likelihood of observing the harassment observed in the data is

then:

)

(

Pr

|
𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡
h𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|
(
𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡
h𝑖𝓁𝑡 = 1 |
|
|
(
) [
1 − Pr

=

h𝑖𝓁𝑡 Pr
(
1 − h𝑖𝓁𝑡

h𝑖𝓁𝑡 = 0 |
|
|

)

+

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

(30)

)]

(28)

)

(
𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

|
𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|

Loan performance likelihood:. The second component
in Eq. (28),
Pr
, is the probability of the observed
total number of weeks to repay and the total number of missed
payments given the loan size and harshness level. If the probability
)
of making a payment in any given week is 𝑝 ̃𝑚
, then
𝑖𝓁𝑡
the probability that the borrower completes the loan in 𝑤 weeks with
𝑓 missed payments according to our model is:

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

In the following subsections we describe the functional form of each
component of the likelihood contribution.

likelihood:. The
first
𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

Harassment
component
(28),
in
(
h𝑖𝓁𝑡
Pr
, is the likelihood of whether
harassment was used at least once or not given the harassment prob-
ability (which depends on the loan size and harshness level), the

Eq.

|
|
|

)

[
𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐶 𝑤
𝑓

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑤−𝑓 −1 [

1 − 𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑓

(31)

where 𝐶 𝑤
can miss 𝑓 payments in 𝑤 weeks under the structure of the loan.

𝑓 is (as in Eq. (29)) the number of possible ways a borrower

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389412K. Leong et al.

The probability of observing

(𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

according to the model

)

=

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|
|
[
𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

) 𝐶 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡
(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

is then:
(
𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

Pr

(
1 − 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡
[
1 − 𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡
(

×

+ 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

1 −

)]𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡−𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡−1

𝑊
∑

𝑤
∑

𝑤=1

𝑓 =0

[
𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐶 𝑤
𝑓

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑤−𝑓 −1

(32)

[
1 − 𝑝 ̃𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

×

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

)]𝑓

The final term in parentheses is the probability that the loan reaches
the terminal period unpaid.

Loan size likelihood and harshness level probabilities:. The third compo-
nent Pr
in Eq. (28) is the probability of the observed
loan size given the harshness level. This is given by:

|
𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
|
|

(
𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

(
𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡

Pr

|
|
|

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝑝𝐿ℎ
𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

=

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )

(
𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡
(
ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

|
|
|
𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )
|
|
|

Pr

where
(

Pr

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )
|
|
|

=

∑

𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡∈L𝑖𝑡

(

𝑝𝐿ℎ
𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )

|
|
|

(33)

(34)

(

𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )

|
|
|

)

)

𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

in the fourth component. We compute 𝑝𝐿ℎ
via simu-
𝑖𝓁𝑡
lation. Given a guess of parameters 𝜽𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟, we compute the
̃
𝑉 𝑖𝓁𝑡
from Eq. (17) for each possible loan size and
harshness level by simulating 𝑛𝑠 = 10,000 repayment paths using the re-
payment probability 𝑝 ̃𝑚
and the harassment proba-
𝑖𝓁𝑡
bility
)
𝑝𝜂
. If the fraction of the actual loan size to the
𝑖𝓁𝑡
, 1
desired loan size is not one of the fractions 1
, or 1, we replace the
2
3
𝜌 in L𝑖𝑡 closest to that in the data with the actual fraction in the data.
To do this, we assume the lender’s weekly discount factor is ̃𝛿 = 0.999,
corresponding to an annual discount factor of 0.95. This is a common
annual discount factor used in empirical settings, such as in Holmes
(2011) and Collard-Wexler (2013). We have also elicited the discount
factor from two ex-lenders and found them to be consistent with this
assumption.

, 2
3

4.2. Estimation of borrower loan demand parameters

We estimate the borrower loan demand parameters, 𝜽𝛼, by estimat-
ing Eq. (1) in log form using a linear regression with borrower fixed
effects:
(𝐿⋆
𝑖𝑡

𝑖 × 𝑟𝑡 + 𝜽𝛼

𝑖 + 𝜐𝑖𝑡

𝑟 ⋅ 𝒙𝛼

= 𝜽𝛼

(35)

log

)

Because the crackdown increased the costs of lending, the cartel of
syndicates responded by increasing the nominal interest rate from 20%
to 35%. All other loan characteristics, such as the maturity, loan reset
structure, and lack of a collateral requirement remained unchanged.
Because the change in the interest rates were due to the crackdown’s
effect on the cost of harassment and not due to changes in demand,
the variation in the interest rate over time with variation in the loan
sizes demanded on the intensive margin identifies the level term 𝜽𝛼
𝑟 .
The differences in how loan demand changes after the crackdown for
borrowers of different characteristics identifies the interaction terms in
𝜽𝛼
𝑟 .

Although the crackdown only affected the interest rate in loan
contracts, the borrower’s consideration sets of lenders changed after
the crackdown as some lenders were arrested or exited. We argue that
this did not have a significant impact on borrowers’ price sensitivity.

Below, we document that the borrowers have price elasticity of −0.817.
If we instead estimate this elasticity using only the 74% subsample of
borrowers who did not borrow from a new lender after the crackdown
(i.e. those borrowers whose normal lenders were still in the market
after the crackdown), we obtain a very similar (and statistically indis-
tinguishable) elasticity of −0.823. Furthermore, in our counterfactual
where we undo the effects of the crackdown, we find only minimal
effects if we reinstate borrowers’ pre-crackdown consideration sets after
the crackdown.

4.3. Estimation of borrower repayment parameters

To estimate the borrower repayment parameters, 𝜽𝑚 and 𝜽𝜎 , we use
variation in the observed total weeks to repay and the number of missed
payments, similar to the second component of the lender likelihood.
As the repayment probability depends on the harshness level, which is
unobserved, we integrate it out using the estimated lender parameters.
The contribution of a loan to this likelihood is given by:

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟

𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ̂𝜽

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎

)

=

(

Pr

∑

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡∈

𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡
(

|
|
|
|

Pr

𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟
̂𝜽

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

|
|
|
|

)

(

× Pr

ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )
̂𝜽

|
|
|
|

The expression for Pr

𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

(

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(36)

)

is analo-

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟
|
̂𝜽
|
|
|

gous to Eq. (32) where we use the estimated lender parameters for the
harassment probabilities:

(

Pr

𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡, 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟
̂𝜽

|
|
|
|
[
𝑝𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

(
̂𝜽

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

=

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡−𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡−1

) 𝐶 𝑤𝑖𝓁𝑡
𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡
(
𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟
̂𝜽

(
1 − 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡
[
1 − 𝑝𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡
(

×

+ 𝑑𝑖𝓁𝑡

1 −

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑓𝑖𝓁𝑡

(37)

𝑊
∑

𝑤
∑

𝑤=1

𝑓 =0

[
𝑝𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

𝐶 𝑤
𝑓

(
𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟
̂𝜽

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)]𝑤−𝑓 −1

[
1 − 𝑝𝑚
𝑖𝓁𝑡

×

(
𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟
̂𝜽

, 𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎 , 𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

)

)]𝑓

4.4. Estimation of borrower harassment disutility and effort cost

We estimate the harassment disutility parameters, 𝜽𝜒 , and effort
cost, 𝜃𝛹 , via simulated maximum likelihood using the observed choices
of lenders by borrowers, taking the estimated values of ̂𝜽
and
𝜎
̂𝜽

as given. The contribution of a loan to the likelihood is given by:
(

𝑚
, ̂𝜽

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟

)

𝜽𝜒 , 𝜃𝛹 , ̂𝜽

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟

𝑚
, ̂𝜽

𝜎
, ̂𝜽

=

𝑉𝑖𝓁′𝑡

|
|
|
|
|
𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟

Pr

𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡 >

max
𝓁′∈{0}∪𝑖𝑡⧵{𝓁}

(
̄𝑉𝑖𝓁𝑡

exp

∑

𝓁′∈{0}∪𝑖𝑡

exp

(
𝜽𝜒 , 𝜃𝛹 , ̂𝜽
(
𝜽𝜒 , 𝜃𝛹 , ̂𝜽

̄𝑉𝑖𝓁′𝑡

(

𝑚
, ̂𝜽

𝜎 ))

, ̂𝜽

(38)

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟

𝜎 ))

𝑚
, ̂𝜽

, ̂𝜽

Because borrowers have different loan histories with different lenders,
lenders differ in how likely they are to choose certain harshness levels
and loan sizes. Lenders are also heterogeneous through their type
𝑘 ∈ {𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟, 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑠ℎ, 𝑉 𝑒𝑟𝑦 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑠ℎ}. We identify 𝜽𝜒 and 𝜃𝛹 through the
borrower’s trade-offs between the loan size they expect to receive, and
the expected penalties and harassment from missing payments from the
lender. Variation in harassment probabilities across lenders identifies
𝜽𝜒 , while variation in loan histories affecting effort levels identifies 𝜃𝛹 .
In order to compute the expected payoff from choosing a lender for
a trial value of 𝜽𝜒 and 𝜃𝛹 , we first need to compute the expected payoff
)
of a lender for a given loan size and harshness level, 𝑣𝑖𝓁𝑡
, as
in Eq. (21). Due to the large number of possible paths, combined with

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389413K. Leong et al.

Table 4
Summary of the variation in the data that identify our parameters.

Parameters determine:

Identified though:

𝜽𝜂

𝜽 ̃𝑚, 𝜽̃𝜎

𝜽𝜅

𝜽𝛼

𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎

𝜽𝜒 , 𝜃𝛹

Lender’s probability of severe
harassment after a missed
payment.

Borrower repayment
probabilities from lender’s
perspective.

Lender’s cost of harassment.

Borrower loan demand
parameters.

Borrower repayment
probabilities from borrower’s
perspective

Borrower harassment disutility
and effort cost

Observed harassment events the data, given the observed
number of missed payments, time to repay, and borrower
and loan characteristics.

Observed number of missed payments and time to repay
given observed borrower and loan characteristics.

Observed loan sizes, where lenders trade off the expected
revenue from a loan of a given size with the expected cost
of harassment at that loan size (determined by the
harassment cost, repayment probability and harassment
probability at that loan size).

Observed borrower loan demand sizes, where the change in
the interest rate from the enforcement event (supply-side
shock) identifies the price elasticity.

Observed number of missed payments and time to repay
given observed borrower and loan characteristics.

Observed choices of lenders by borrowers, where borrowers
trade off the expected loan size with the expected disutility
of harassment (𝜽𝜒 ) and expected cost of effort (𝜃𝛹 ), which
vary by lender type, harassment probabilities, and past
lending history.

)]

(𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

a large number of different lenders, harshness levels and loan sizes,
we compute these expected payoffs via simulation. We first calculate
the expected payoff E [𝑢𝑖𝓁𝑡𝑤
in each possible state for each
week. We numerically evaluate the conditional and unconditional ex-
pectations in these expressions using Gauss–Hermite quadrature with
200 nodes. We provide the exact expressions for these approximations
in Section A.9 in the Online Appendix. We then simulate 𝑛𝑠 = 10,000
repayment paths for each possible loan using the borrower’s repayment
probabilities. We use the discount factors, present bias and coefficients
of relative risk aversion elicited from the surveys for 𝛿𝑖, 𝛽𝑖, and 𝛾𝑖,
respectively.

With the expression in Eq. (21) calculated for each possible loan
size and harshness level the lender could choose, we can compute the
expected payoff for a lender using Eq. (22) together with the estimated
lender choice probabilities, 𝑝𝐿ℎ
𝑖𝓁𝑡

. We compute this

𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 )
̂𝜽

𝐿𝑖𝓁𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝓁𝑡

(

for every lender in each borrower’s consideration set. In addition,
we compute the value of the outside option for each borrower using
Eq. (23). This allows us to compute the likelihood in Eq. (38).

|
|
|
|

Similar to the approach of estimating dynamic entry models (Ryan,
2012; Collard-Wexler, 2013), we also include potential loan instances
for each borrower where they chose the outside option of no loan when
estimating 𝜽𝜒 and 𝜃𝛹 . We construct these potential loans based on
the median time interval between loans for each borrower, over the
time they were active taking out loans. We do this separately before
and after the crackdown, as their loan frequency may change after
the crackdown. For a simple example of this approach, suppose we
observe a borrower taking out loans in July 2009, January 2010, July
2010, and July 2011. The time intervals are 6, 6, and 12 months. The
median number of months is therefore 6 months. For this borrower,
we would assume that loan instances arrive every 6 months and they
chose the outside option in January 2011. This procedure leads to the
outside option being chosen approximately 39.9% of the time. We have
also tested the sensitivity of our estimates to changing the number
of potential loans. We did this by increasing the number of potential
loans by 10% and reestimating our parameters. Only the borrower
harassment disutility and effort cost are affected by this change. These
increase slightly in magnitude (between 1%–18%) compared to our
baseline model.

Finally, we summarize the identification arguments for all the pa-

rameters discussed above in Table 4.

5. Estimation results

Table 5 shows our parameter estimates. The first two columns
in the upper part of the table shows the estimates of the borrower
repayment probability parameters. The first shows those from the bor-
rower’s perspective, whereas the second shows those from the lender’s
perspective. The difference between these columns is that the lender
does not observe certain borrower characteristics in the first loan,
such as their addictions, prior convictions, or gang membership status.
Instead, these characteristics are interacted with having a loan history
with the borrower. Based on our modeling approach, these coefficients
can be interpreted in S$ terms when multiplied by 1,000. The estimates
show that borrowers increase the cash they have available when faced
with a higher harassment probability, showing the effectiveness of
higher harshness for lenders. When the interest rate increased after the
crackdown, borrowers put in less effort into repayment.

Borrowers who have previously been in prison and who treat friends
regularly have lower repayment ability, while more patient borrowers
and borrowers involved in a gang have higher repayment ability,
because they may have access to more money-making opportunities.
We also estimate that gamblers have a higher variance in income, com-
pared to non-gamblers. The harshness level intercepts in the harassment
probability parameter estimates capture heterogeneity across harsh-
ness levels, although imprecisely estimated. The average harassment
probabilities for each harshness level are 0.3%, 5.6% and 59.9%.

The harassment cost is estimated to be S$437 before the crackdown
for regular lenders, and increasing to S$1,487 afterwards. This cost
includes both the actual cost of harassment, such as fees paid to
runners, and the expected disutility from possible arrest. Harsh lenders
have a 22.1% lower harassment cost, while very harsh lenders have a
11.9% lower cost. These lower costs explain why they employ more
severe forms harassment more frequently. The harassment disutility
and effort costs do not have a direct dollar interpretation, but a back-of-
the-envelope calculation shows that the median borrower would need
to be compensated at least S$2,599.91 to be willing to accept certain
harassment from a regular lender in a period. This is significant as the
modal borrower earns between S$2,000–3,000 per month. Harassment
from harsh and very harsh lenders gives borrowers more disutility, be-
cause these are more likely to employ more severe forms of harassment.
For the harshest lenders, the same back-of-the-envelope calculation
shows that the borrower would need to be compensated S$5,301.48

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389414K. Leong et al.

Table 5
Parameter estimation results.

Constant
Lender type: Harsh
Lender type: Very harsh
Harassment probability
Prevailing interest rate
No lending history
Number of previous loans
Number of previous loans squared
Number of missed payments in last loan
Asked for loan under the influence of alcohol
Age
Has post-secondary education
Female
Married (rel. to single)
Divorced (rel. to single)
Has children
Malaysian (rel. to Singaporean Chinese)
Indian (rel. to Singaporean Chinese)
Currently a gang member
Previously a gang member
Number of previous convictions
Drinks alcohol
Uses drugs
Frequents sex workers
Frequently treats friends
Borrower’s discounting, 𝛽𝑖 × 𝛿𝑖
Borrower’s risk aversion, 𝛾𝑖
Gambles (in 𝜃𝜎 and 𝜃̃𝜎 )
Loan size
Low harshness level intercept
Medium harshness level intercept
High harshness level intercept

Constant
Lender type: Harsh (multiplier for 𝜽𝜅 )
Lender type: Very harsh (multiplier for 𝜽𝜅 )
Post crackdown

Cash for
repayments
(borrower)

Cash for
repayments
(lender)

𝜽𝑚, 𝜽𝜎

1.022
0.027
0.103
0.257
−2.395
−0.770
0.024
−0.003
−0.087
−0.024
0.007
−0.070
0.099
0.018
0.046
−0.060
0.059
−0.023
0.097
0.037
−0.023
−0.056
−0.005
0.057
−0.142
0.174
0.090
0.528

(0.124)
(0.027)
(0.071)
(0.032)
(0.182)
(0.046)
(0.008)
(0.001)
(0.004)
(0.015)
(0.002)
(0.030)
(0.040)
(0.043)
(0.044)
(0.042)
(0.033)
(0.040)
(0.036)
(0.027)
(0.012)
(0.052)
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.038)
(0.070)
(0.061)
(0.042)

𝜽 ̃𝑚, 𝜽̃𝜎

1.071
−0.019
0.013
0.384
−2.208
0.320
0.002
−0.001
−0.054
0.001
0.004
−0.064
0.074
0.025
0.038
−0.039
0.060
0.006
0.054
0.045
−0.005
−0.071
0.011
0.011
−0.161
0.094
0.023
0.409

(0.240)
(0.018)
(0.029)
(0.203)
(1.044)
(0.418)
(0.004)
(0.000)
(0.045)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.021)
(0.070)
(0.015)
(0.061)
(0.010)
(0.053)
(0.009)
(0.115)
(0.090)
(0.008)
(0.025)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.350)
(0.042)
(0.023)
(0.420)

Harassment
cost
𝜽𝜅

0.437
−0.221
−0.119
1.050

(1.237)
(0.229)
(0.754)
(0.557)

Harassment
disutility
𝜽𝜒

1.302
0.248
1.616

(0.047)
(0.078)
(0.481)

Lender
harassment
probability

𝜽𝜂

0.383
1.552

(1.820)
(5.481)

(0.117)
(0.131)
(0.007)
(0.074)
(0.491)
(0.033)
(1.452)
(1.477)
(1.152)
(0.480)
(0.016)
(0.168)
(0.359)
(0.509)
(0.225)
(0.126)
(0.273)
(0.102)
(0.256)
(0.571)
(0.060)
(0.413)
(1.366)
(1.161)
(4.662)
(4.564)
(1.919)

−0.085
−0.084
0.004
−0.190
−0.448
−0.047
−0.939
−0.569
−1.115
−0.211
0.006
−0.009
−0.331
−0.947
−0.092
−0.081
−0.625
0.073
0.289
−0.268
−0.028
−0.454
1.871
1.368
−5.832
−2.287
1.442

Effort
cost
𝜽𝜓

1.528

(0.022)

Robust standard errors clustered at the borrower level are shown in parentheses. For 𝜽 ̃𝑚 and 𝜽𝜂 , gang affiliation, prior convictions, addictions,
discounting and risk aversion are interacted with a dummy for having a past loan history with the lender, as these characteristics are unobserved
by lenders for the first loan. The constant terms in 𝜽̃𝜎 and 𝜽𝜎 are normalized to 1.

Table 6
Borrower demand estimates.

Interest rate
Interest rate ×Age
Interest rate ×Post-secondary education
Interest rate ×Female
Interest rate ×Married (rel. to single)
Interest rate ×Divorced (rel. to single)
Interest rate ×Has children
Interest rate ×Malaysian (rel. to Singaporean Chinese)
Interest rate ×Indian (rel. to Singaporean Chinese)
Interest rate ×Drinks alcohol
Interest rate ×Uses drugs
Interest rate ×Frequents sex workers
Interest rate ×Gambles

Borrower fixed effects
Number of observations

Log Loan Asked

−5.818
−0.039
0.075
2.059
0.112
0.047
−0.205
0.766
0.740
0.696
0.345
0.028
2.907

Yes
10269

(0.906)
(0.015)
(0.242)
(0.326)
(0.426)
(0.449)
(0.428)
(0.285)
(0.321)
(0.512)
(0.213)
(0.237)
(0.382)

Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the borrower level.

to be willing to accept certain harassment. These numbers may appear
very large in comparison to the median loan size of S$1,000. However,
unless the borrower misses several payments in a row, harassment only
occurs when both a payment is missed and the lender uses severe
harassment. In any given week, this occurs with probability 3.8% for

the average borrower. Harassment also only occurs in the future, which
borrowers discount very heavily. According to our model estimates, the
median borrower be willing to pay S$107.48 each week throughout the
course of a loan to eliminate the disutility from harassment, but still
retaining the loan resetting property.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389415K. Leong et al.

Table 7
Decomposing the effects of the crackdown.

No
Crackdown
(Level)
(1)

Crackdown
(Baseline)
(Level)
(2)

Overall
(% Difference)
(3)

Only 𝜅𝓁𝑡
Increases
(% Difference)
(4)

Only 𝑟𝑡
Increases
(% Difference)
(5)

Total lender profits (in S$m)
Total loan volume (in S$m)
Average harassment probability chosen
Total interest revenue (in S$m)
Total harassment costs (in S$m)
Average borrower surplus (in S$000)
Average number of missed payments
Average number of times harassed

3.08
2.63
0.17
6.99
1.28
0.51
4.58
1.93

1.00
1.35
0.08
6.66
4.31
0.45
6.00
2.52

−67.66
−48.64
−51.10
−4.75
+ 235.88
−12.38
+ 30.78
+ 31.02

−94.16
−4.82
−32.31
−4.36
+ 212.06
+ 2.06
+ 1.04
−6.78

+ 36.16
−46.44
−26.82
−0.95
+ 3.03
−13.55
+ 27.76
+ 32.59

Column (3) shows the baseline (total) effects of the crackdown. Column (4) shows the effects of the crackdown if only the harassment cost,
𝜅𝓁𝑡, increased. Column (5) shows the effects of only the nominal interest rate, 𝑟𝑡, increasing from 20% to 35%.

Table 6 shows the estimates of the borrower loan demand parame-
ters 𝜽𝛼. These estimates show that borrower loan demand is decreasing
in the interest rate, but gamblers have a lower price sensitivity. In a
regression of log loan demand on log interest rate with borrower fixed
effects, the price elasticity of loan demand is −0.817. In Table A.4 in
the Online Appendix we show how well our model is able to match our
data. The expected loan outcomes at the estimated parameters match
the average number of weeks, number of missed payments, proportion
of loans with harassment, and loan sizes reasonably well on aggregate.

6. Policy interventions in the IML market

6.1. Cracking down on lenders

6.1.1. Decomposing the effects of the crackdown on loan outcomes

We use our model estimates to decompose the effects of the crack-
down on lender profits, borrower payoffs and the total value of dis-
bursed loans. Our sample period spans 2009–2016 and the crackdown
occurred in 2014. We run a counterfactual simulation where we assume
the crackdown did not occur and compare payoffs and loan sizes in the
2014–2016 period to the baseline scenario where the crackdown does
occur. We then run further counterfactuals to decompose the effects of
the crackdown.

The crackdown affected three elements in our model. First, the
crackdown increased the lenders’ cost of harassment, 𝜅𝓁𝑡. In the no-
crackdown counterfactual, we assume this cost would have remained at
the pre-crackdown level. Second, in response to the increased costs, the
cartel raised the nominal interest rate, 𝑟𝑡, from 20% to 35%. Because
the original 20% rate was stable throughout our pre-crackdown data
from 2009–2013, in the no-crackdown scenario we assume it would
have remained at 20%.15 We use the borrower loan demand function
to compute the adjusted loan demand to this interest rate. Third,
the crackdown caused lenders to be arrested and exit the market,
which impacted the borrowers’ consideration sets of lenders, 
𝑖𝑡. In the
no-crackdown counterfactual, we assume exited and arrested lenders
stayed in the market and add them back to the borrowers’ consideration
sets. In Section A.4 in the Online Appendix, we also provide further
evidence that rule out alternative explanations for the change in ha-
rassment costs, interest rate and lender exit in 2014. To decompose
the effects of the crackdown, we show the impact of changing the
harassment cost, 𝜅𝓁𝑡, and the interest rate, 𝑟𝑡, in isolation and compare
their effects to the no-counterfactual scenario.

15 We obtained details of 23 loans taken out by borrowers in Malaysia
over 2012–2015 from a charity that helps IML borrowers. The same cartel
of syndicates operates in this market and used the same 6-week loan structure
with a 20% nominal interest rate throughout this entire period, providing
further evidence that the cartel would have maintained the 20% rate in the
absence of the crackdown.

The results of this counterfactual experiment are summarized in
Table 7. The crackdown caused a large decrease in total lender profits
from S$3.08 m to S$1.00 m. This was accompanied by a large decrease
in the volume of disbursed loans of 48.6%. Although the interest rate in-
creased after the crackdown, the reduction in loan sizes meant that total
interest revenue fell by only 4.75%. The decrease in profits therefore
is mostly driven by the increase in harassment costs, which increased
by 235.9%. This increase is mainly due to the large increase in the
unit cost of harassment, but lenders also harassed borrowers 31% more
often despite on average choosing a lower harassment probabilities in
the event of a missed payment. This is because borrowers missed 31%
more payments, as they put in less effort in repaying with the higher
interest rate. This result is consistent with Table 2, which shows that
lenders conducted harassment more frequently after the crackdown in
2014. Although not reported in the table, lenders with a harsh type
reduced their average harassment probability from 20.6% to 11.4%,
and very harsh lender types from 28.2% to 16.4%.

Borrowers were also negatively affected by the crackdown, where
we find a 12.4% decrease in surplus. To compute borrower welfare
under each scenario, we first convert borrower surplus to dollar values
by calculating a certainty equivalent amount for each borrower. We
do this by calculating the amount of money a borrower would need to
receive each week over the 𝑊 weeks to be indifferent between it and
the option value of borrowing from lenders. We follow the standard in
the literature (e.g. Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2010) and measure borrower
welfare using week-zero preferences at their stated discount factors.
If we instead assume a more standard 0.95 annual discount factor
with no quasi-hyperbolic discounting, borrower surplus decreases by
8.9% instead of 12.4%. Borrower surplus decreases because borrowers
receive smaller loans, yet have to make weekly interest payments
similar in size to pre-crackdown amounts because of the interest rate
increase. Because of the interest rate increase and lower harassment
probabilities, borrowers put in less effort to make repayments, resulting
in more missed payments. This increase in missed payments ultimately
results in more harassment, despite lenders choosing lower harassment
probabilities.

Columns (4)-(5) of Table 7 decompose the effects of the crack-
down.16 Column (4) shows that if only the harassment cost increased
without an accompanying interest rate increase, then lending would
have become almost unprofitable. Because of the higher cost of harass-
ment, lenders choose a lower harassment probability which improves
borrower welfare. Column (5) shows that if the cartel raised its in-
terest rate to 35% without a crackdown, it could have raised its joint
profitability. We explore cartel optimal interest rate setting in the next
subsection. In Table A.5 in the Online Appendix we show evidence of

16 The change in the composition of borrower consideration sets in the
crackdown does not have a meaningful impact on loan outcomes. We therefore
omit this part of the decomposition from the table.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389416K. Leong et al.

Fig. 1. Percentage change in total lender profits at alternative interest rates before and after the crackdown.

heterogeneous effects of the crackdown. We find that gamblers, drug-
users and drinkers were especially affected by the crackdown, but gang
members were less affected.

Our model only includes the payoffs of borrowers and lenders and
does not include the welfare of the borrowers’ friends and families,
which may also be affected by the loans through harassment. This is
an example of the negative externalities that IML generates. Because
the crackdown caused borrowers to miss more payments and be ha-
rassed more often, the estimated decrease in borrower welfare from
the crackdown is arguably a lower bound. As shown in Table A.2 in
the Online Appendix we observe if the harassment events were on the
borrower only or on family, friends, colleagues or neighbors of the
borrower. In Table A.6 in the Online Appendix, we regress the instances
of harassment events affecting external parties on a post-crackdown
dummy. In the richest specification with borrower–lender pair fixed
effects and controlling for past loan history, we observe an increase
in 5.7 percentage points over baseline of 27.2% in the likelihood of
harassment on external parties. Through these externalities, this is
evidence that the crackdown had even larger negative welfare impacts
than we measure. Overall, however, the crackdown was successful at
lowering the volume of loans, reducing the incentives for borrowers to
borrow from this market, and hurting the profits of lenders. Although
we do not have precise estimates of the cost of this crackdown, the
27.3% increase in manpower indicates that the costs were significant.

6.1.2. Effects of the crackdown on cartel interest-rate setting

In our no-crackdown counterfactual above, we assumed that the car-
tel would continue to advise lenders to charge a 20% nominal interest
rate on loans and did not allow the cartel to endogenously optimize
their rate. Fig. 1 shows the results of a counterfactual experiment
where we simulate loans at alternative interest rates set by the cartel
and compute the relative changes in joint profitability for lenders. In
the pre-crackdown period of 2009–2013, the interest rate charged by
lenders was 20%. We compute the expected total profits for all lenders
if the cartel had instead set the interest rate differently. We present
results for all interest rates between 15% and 55% at 5 percentage point
intervals. We adjust loan demand, borrower effort, lender choices, and
the endogenously chosen loan sizes and harshness levels accordingly
for each interest rate.17

17 We do not endogenize the cartel choosing the interest rate in our baseline
model because we do not have sufficient variation in our data to do so. We
only observe two main interest-rate regimes, the pre-crackdown rate of 20%
and the post-crackdown rate of 35%. Instead, as in Asker et al. (2021), we
take the cartel’s optimal choices as given.

At 20%, the percentage change relative to the baseline is zero
because 20% is the baseline rate observed during this time period. We
find that if the cartel lowered the interest rate to below 20%, total
lender profits would have fallen. However, the lenders as a whole
would have benefited from a higher interest rate. An interest rate
of 35% would have maximized lender profits before the crackdown.
Above 35%, lender profits begin to fall because at this higher rate, loan
demand is smaller and borrower effort is reduced substantially.

There are several reasons why we did not observe the cartel advising
lenders to use the profit-maximizing rate of 35% in our data during
the pre-crackdown period. First, because of the number of different
syndicates operating in the market, they may not have been able to
sustain the higher rate of 35%. At 35%, the incentive for one syndicate
to deviate to a lower rate would have been too large. Second, if the
syndicates made such large profits, it would have encouraged other
entrants into the market. The syndicates may have kept the interest
rate lower to deter further entry into the market. Third, if the syndicates
were making even larger profits the authorities may have cracked down
on the market sooner. They may have chosen the lower rate to stay off
the radar of law enforcement.

After the crackdown, the baseline interest rate was 35%. We omit
2014 from this analysis because during this year the interest rate rose
in 5 percentage point increments before stabilizing at 35%. Over the
2015–2016 period, our model predicts that 35% was the optimal rate.
Because of the increase in costs and reduced profitability, it became
easier for the cartel to sustain the optimal rate. Furthermore, with
reduced profitability, the cartel also had less incentive to deter future
entrants.

6.1.3. Effects of crackdown intensity

We also use our model to simulate the impacts of varying the
intensity of the crackdown. We do this by considering different values
of the post-crackdown lender unit cost of harassment, 𝜃𝜅
𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡. We con-
sider values from 90% smaller to 90% larger, in 10 percentage-point
increments. For each new value of 𝜃𝜅
𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡, we also find the optimal cartel
interest rate in 5 percentage-point increments. At the alternative unit
costs of harassments we consider, 35% is always the optimal cartel rate.
We then simulate loan outcomes using each different value of 𝜃𝜅
𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 and
compare loan outcomes to the counterfactual case of no-crackdown in
the 2015–16 period. We show the results in Figure A.1 in the Online
Appendix. At higher intensity levels, loan sizes are smaller and lenders
use harassment less frequently because it is more costly. Because the
harassment probability effect dominates the loan size effect, borrowers
are slightly less worse off with more intense crackdowns compared
to less intense ones. The most intense version we consider leads to a

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389417K. Leong et al.

Fig. 2. Effects of targeting borrowers on lender outcomes.

decrease in borrower surplus of 11.2%, whereas the least intense leads
to a decrease of 15.7%.

6.2. Targeting borrowers

As an alternative market intervention, we consider the effect of re-
moving different types of borrowers on lender profits. These borrowers
could be removed in practice by either offering them formal-market al-
ternatives, providing rehabilitation for their gambling, drug or alcohol
use, or educating them on the perils of borrowing from loan sharks.
We have spent over 100 h interviewing 4 of the 5 major charities that
help IML borrowers in Singapore.18 From our interviews with these
organizations in Singapore, we gathered supporting evidence that these
organizations, due to their limited resources and lack of staff, can only
support a very small fraction of the borrowers that approach them,
and often focus on those with the lowest repayment ability that are
harassed more frequently.19 In this counterfactual, we aim to provide
guidance to these charities on how helping different types of borrowers
can have a differential impact on lenders’ profits. The charities – some
of which that were founded by former police officers – share the same
aim as law enforcement in eradicating this market, and lowering lender
profitability can help achieve this goal.

We sort borrowers by their average loan repayment probability and
group them into twenty groups, such that the sum of the desired loan
size within each group is approximately equal. Thus each group, or
‘‘vintile’’, has a similar size in terms of loan demand but differs in their
repayment ability. We consider the effect of removing each of these
groups in turn on lender profits. We implicitly assume that removing
only 5% of borrowers has no effect on the market interest rate or
harassment schedule of lenders.

The results of this counterfactual experiment are shown in Fig. 2.20
We find that removing the worst borrowers (vintile 1) is the least
effective at lowering lender profits. This is because these borrowers are
more costly for lenders to serve as they miss many payments, leading

18 A report conducted by the Singaporean Ministry of Law that lists these
organizations and their roles can be found here: https://www.mlaw.gov.sg/
files/news/press-releases/2015/05/Rep.pdf.

19 The charities were typically staffed with only 3–4 volunteers. Over the
six months that we spent working with these charities we observed that many
borrowers that came to seek help did not receive any because the charities
were unable to meet the demand.

20 The fluctuations in outcomes across vintiles are due to not being able to
split borrowers in twenty groups with exactly the same loan demand. If we
use a coarser grouping, such as 10 groups, we obtain a similar-shaped figure
but with less noise.

to high harassment costs. Lenders often only give these borrowers
smaller loan sizes relative to what they request, such that they are
better able to repay them. Removing borrowers from the middle of the
distribution, especially near the 75th percentile, hurts lenders the most.
These borrowers are the most profitable for the lender because they
still miss several payments, leading to greater payment penalty revenue
for the lender, while at the same time they do not miss too many
payments such that they need to be harassed very frequently. Removing
the borrowers with the highest repayment ability (vintile 20) lowers the
volume of loans the most, but does not impact the lenders’ profits as
much as those in the middle of the distribution. This is because these
borrowers do not miss many payments and earn the lenders less in
interest payment revenue, although they are also less costly to serve.
Therefore targeting borrowers in the center of the repayment ability
distribution is the most effective at hurting lender profits.

This counterfactual can also be interpreted as the result of a change
in usury rates. A relaxation of interest rate caps would in fact allow
formal intermediaries to offer credit to high-risk borrowers at high
interest rates. We can then think of a progressive increase in usury
rates as causing the inclusion into formal credit of IML borrowers
starting from the highest vintile of repayment ability and moving down
cumulatively. If the objective of policy makers is to raise interest rate
caps to harm profits of loan sharks, our results can quantify how these
profit losses would increase by offering increasingly risky borrowers a
formal alternative.

The characteristics of borrowers that represent the best and worst
borrowers can be seen in the parameter estimates in Table 5. We
also show the average borrower characteristics for the most and least
profitable vintiles in Table A.7 in the Online Appendix. The most
profitable borrowers are on average more likely to be in a gang, have
fewer convictions, be less likely to gamble and use drugs. Therefore
enforcement efforts targeting gang members, such as drug pushers,
also can have a large knock-on effect on the lenders in the loan shark
market. Potential IML borrowers and their repayment ability could also
be identified by collaborating with the licensed payday lending sector.
The members of the Credit Association of Singapore (CAS) try to refer
borrowers rejected from formal credit to charitable organizations to
prevent them from going to IML market. In Section A.2.2 in the Online
Appendix we discuss interviews with have carried out with the CAS.

We also ran a related counterfactual experiment where we target
borrowers having a particular characteristic. We did this for gamblers,
drug users, prior convicts and gang members. These borrowers could
be identified, for example, through conviction records or through re-
hab centers. We did this by randomly drawing borrowers having that
characteristic until we have removed 5% of the total loan demand. We
repeated this 1,000 times and calculated the mean decrease in lender

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389418K. Leong et al.

Table 8
Effects of indirect interventions on lender profits.

Intervention

Median Impact on

Lender Profits

Borrower Surplus

Stop a borrower gambling
Stop a borrower using drugs
Remove a borrower’s present bias (setting borrower’s 𝛽𝑖 to 1)
Set a borrower’s 𝛽𝑖 to 1 and 𝛿𝑖 to 0.999 (0.95 annual discount factor)

−26.16
−13.62
−46.09
−57.07

23.09%
7.68%
6.66%
13.45%

Fig. 3. Heterogeneous effects of discounting interventions.

profits from these draws. In each case the total effect on lender profits
was similar, between 4.4–5.2%. This is because of the large degree of
overlap between borrowers with such characteristics.

borrower fixed effect by regressing the estimated fixed effects on the
characteristic, and using this regression to compute a counterfactual
borrower fixed effect with an altered characteristic.

6.3. Effects of indirect interventions

We now consider the impact of indirect interventions on lender prof-
itability, such as reducing gambling or drug use, or improving financial
literacy. The charities we have interviewed organize support groups to
help people out of their addictions and improve their financial choices.
These charities also try to help borrowers learn ‘‘the value of money’’,
which can be interpreted as helping borrowers improve their financial
literacy and reduce their heavy time discounting. We show an example
flyer for a support group aiming to reduce gambling and improve finan-
cial literacy in Figure A.2 in the Online Appendix. Singapore’s National
Council for Problem Gambling also allows individuals to apply for self-
exclusion from gambling for at least one year, providing them with a
commitment device to reduce their gambling.21 Self-exclusion excludes
them from casinos, jackpot machine rooms and online gambling on
Singapore Pools, a state-owned lottery company.

To perform this counterfactual, we consider removing a single
borrower’s addiction to either gambling or drugs, or reducing the extent
of their time discounting. We then compute the impact of this change
on the lender’s profits it chooses to borrow from, as well as on the
borrower’s own surplus. We do this separately for each borrower and
report the median impacts. When we alter one of the borrowers’ char-
acteristics, we adjust the borrower’s repayment ability, and allow all
endogenous choices to change. That is, the borrower’s loan demand and
lender choice, and the lender’s choice of loan size and harshness level.
Borrower loan demand depends on these characteristics through the
price sensitivity and the fixed effects, 𝜃𝛼
𝑖 . We compute a counterfactual

21 https://www.ncpg.org.sg/services/self-exclusions-and-visit-limits/apply-

self-exclusion/for-individuals

The results from this counterfactual are shown in Table 8. The
results show that reducing gambling and drug use among borrowers
lowers lender profitability and increases borrower surplus. Although
removing these traits among borrowers improves their repayment abil-
ity and requires less costly harassment to serve, they demand smaller
loans from lenders which ultimately means they become less profitable.
A similar effect occurs when we make borrowers more forward-looking.
Removing a borrower’s present bias, which means setting their 𝛽𝑖 = 1,
reduces the median lender’s profits by 46.1%. If additionally we make
borrowers discount the future with a 0.95 annual discount factor, the
median lender’s profits fall by 57.1%. Again, this is because more
forward-looking borrowers put in more effort to make repayments, but
also demand smaller loans. The reduction in profits is largely driven
by this smaller loan demand. Changing borrower discounting also
improves borrowers’ payoffs, when evaluated using an annual discount
factor of 0.95 without present bias.

The effect sizes of these interventions also depend on the initial
discounting of the borrower. In Fig. 3 we show how much the median
lender profits change in six equally-sized bins of the borrower’s 𝛽𝑖𝛿𝑖.
When borrowers are very impatient, with weekly 𝛽𝑖𝛿𝑖 ∈ [0.25, 0.3705],
the effect is largest at over 60% in both cases. The effect for more
patient borrowers, with weekly 𝛽𝑖𝛿𝑖 ∈ [0.8527, 0.9733], is smallest, but
still cause a decrease in lender profits of over 10%.

7. Conclusion

Illegal money lending is prevalent across the world, yet due to a
lack of high-quality data, empirical studies of this illegal market are
scarce. We use highly detailed survey data from over one thousand
borrowers to estimate a structural model of the illegal money lending
market in Singapore. We use this model to evaluate the effects of
a large enforcement crackdown that occurred in this market during

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389419K. Leong et al.

our sample period, and to evaluate alternative policy interventions.
We find that the crackdown was highly successful at lowering the
payoffs of lenders and borrowers in the market, as well as lowering the
total volume of loans disbursed. Removing borrowers from the market,
either through offering formal market alternatives, rehabilitation or
education programs, also hurts lenders, particularly if they focus on
medium-performing borrowers in terms of loan repayment time. Indi-
rect interventions that reduce gambling addictions or improve financial
literacy and lower borrower discounting are also effective at reducing
lender profitability.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kaiwen Leong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Huailu Li: Writing – re-
view & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Nicola Pavanini: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Soft-
ware, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation,
Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Christoph Walsh: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

This research was partially funded by a Singapore Ministry of
Education Tier 1 grant (Grant Name: MOE AcRF Tier 1; Grant Number:
2015-T1-002-061). Authors declare that they have not received other
significant financial support, in the form of consultant fees, grants,
retainers, and the like, or in-kind support, from parties with financial,
political, or ideological stakes in the effect of anything we study in this
paper. Authors do not serve in any paid or unpaid position with an
organization whose positions, goals, or financial interests relate to this
research. And no party other than the authors had the right to review it
before submission. Authors received the ethics approval from Nanyang
Technological University’s IRB.

Data availability

Leong, Kaiwen; Li, Huailu; Pavanini, Nicola; Walsh, Christoph (202
4), ‘‘FINEC-D-23-00516_Leong-Li-Pavanini-Walsh_The-Effects-of-Poli
cy-Interventions-to-Limit-Illegal-Money-Lending’’, Mendeley Data, V
2, (Reference data) (Mendeley Data).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Allcott, H., Kim, J., Taubinsky, D., Zinman, J., 2022. Are high-interest loans predatory?

Theory and evidence from payday lending. Rev. Econ. Stud. 89 (3), 1041–1084.

Allen, J., Clark, R., Houde, J.-F., 2019. Search frictions and market power in negotiated

price markets. J. Polit. Econ. 127 (4).

Asker, J., Collard-Wexler, A., De Loecker, J., 2021. The welfare impact of market power:

The OPEC cartel. Working Paper.

Becker, G.S., Murphy, K.M., Grossman, M., 2006. The market for illegal goods: The

case of drugs. J. Polit. Econ. 114 (1), 38–60.

Benetton, M., 2021. Leverage regulation and market structure: A structural model of

the UK mortgage market. J. Finance 76 (6), 2997–3053.

Bertrand, M., Morse, A., 2011. Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and payday

borrowing. J. Finance LXVI (6), 1865–1893.

Blattman, C., Jamison, J.C., Sheridan, M., 2017. Reducing crime and violence: Exper-
imental evidence from cognitive behavioral therapy in Liberia. Amer. Econ. Rev.
107 (4), 1165–1206.

Blitz, R.C., Long, M.F., 1965. The economics of usury regulation. J. Polit. Econ. 73 (6),

608–619.

Carvalho, L.S., Meier, S., Wang, S.W., 2016. Poverty and economic decision-making:
Evidence from changes in financial resources at payday. Am. Econ. Rev. 106 (2),
260–284.

Caskey, J.P., 1991. Pawnbroking in America: The economics of a forgotten credit

market. J. Money Credit Bank. 23 (1), 85–99.

Chong, E., 2015. China-based loanshark jailed 4 years and fined $600K for unlicensed
moneylending. the Straits Times, URL https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/co
urts-crime/china-based-loanshark-jailed-4-years-and-fined-600k-for-unlicensed.
Collard-Wexler, A., 2013. Demand fluctuations in the ready-mix concrete industry.

Econometrica 81 (3), 1003–1037.

Crawford, G.S., Pavanini, N., Schivardi, F., 2018. Asymmetric information and imperfect

competition in lending markets. Amer. Econ. Rev. 108 (7), 1659–1701.

Cuesta, J.I., Sepúlveda, A., 2021. Price regulation in credit markets: A trade-off between

consumer protection and credit access. Working Paper.

Curtis, G.E., Elan, S.L., Hudson, R.A., Kollars, N.A., 2002. Transnational activities of

Chinese crime organizations. Trends Organ. Crime 7 (3), 19–57.

de Quidt, J., Fetzer, T., Ghatak, M., 2018. Market structure and borrower welfare in

microfinance. Econom. J. 128, 1019–1046.

DFAT, 2019. DFAT country information report Malaysia. Australian Government

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Diamond, D., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Rev. Econ.

Stud. 51 (3), 393–414.

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility:
Evidence from the U.S. banking sector. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 169–216.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Ryan, S.P., Schrimpf, P., Cullen, M.R., 2013. Selection on

moral hazard in health insurance. Amer. Econ. Rev. 103 (1), 178–219.

Einav, L., Jenkins, M., Levin, J., 2012. Contract pricing in consumer credit markets.

Econometrica 80 (4), 1387–1432.

Ellison, A., Collard, S., Forster, R., 2006. Illegal Lending in the UK. Research Report

URN 06/1883 published by the UK Department of Trade and Industry.

Emmers, R., 2003. The threat of transnational crime in southeast Asia: Drug trafficking,

human smuggling and trafficking and sea piracy. Revista UNISCI (2), 1–11.

Fedaseyeu, V., 2020. Debt collection agencies and the supply of consumer credit. J.

Financ. Econ. 138 (1), 193–221.

Financial Conduct Authority, 2017. Shining a Light on Illegal Money Lending: Consumer

Experiences of Unauthorised Lending in the UK. Report.

Fonseca, J., 2023. Less mainstream credit, more payday borrowing? Evidence from debt

collection restrictions. J. Finance 78 (1), 63–103.

Galenianos, M., Gavazza, A., 2017. A structural model of the retail market for illicit

drugs. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (3), 858–896.

Galenianos, M., Pacula, R.L., Persico, N., 2012. A search-theoretic model of the retail

market for illicit drugs. Rev. Econ. Stud. 79 (3), 1239–1269.

Gathergood, J., Guttman-Kenney, B., Hunt, S., 2019. How do payday loans affect

borrowers? Evidence from the U.K. market. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (2), 496–523.

Gustafson, M.T., Ivanov, I.T., Meisenzahl, R.R., 2021. Bank monitoring: Evidence from

syndicated loans. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (2), 452–477.

Heidhues, P., Kőszegi, B., 2010. Exploiting naivete about self-control in the credit

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

market. Amer. Econ. Rev. 100 (5), 2279–2303.

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103894.

Holmes, T.J., 2011. The diffusion of wal-mart and economies of density. Econometrica

References

79 (1), 253–302.

Home Office, 2018. Country Policy and Information Note: Fear of Illegal Moneylenders,

Vietnam. Vietnam: Country Policy and Information Notes, Vietnam.

Jacobi, L., Sovinsky, M., 2016. Marijuana on main street? Estimating demand in markets

Adams, W., Einav, L., Levin, J., 2009. Liquidity constraints and imperfect information

with limited access. Amer. Econ. Rev. 106 (8), 2009–2045.

in subprime lending. Amer. Econ. Rev. 99 (1), 49–84.

Adda, J., McConnell, B., Rasul, I., 2014. Crime and the depenalization of cannabis
possession: Evidence from a policing experiment. J. Polit. Econ. 122 (5),
1130–1202.

Agarwal, S., Chomsisengphet, S., Mahoney, N., Stroebel, J., 2015. Regulating consumer
financial products: Evidence from credit cards. Q. J. Econ. 130 (1), 111–164.
Aleem, I., 1990. Imperfect information, screening, and the costs of informal lending: A
study of a rural credit market in Pakistan. World Bank Econ. Rev. 4 (3), 329–349.

Kaboski, J.P., Townsend, R.M., 2011. A structural evaluation of a large-scale
quasi-experimental microfinance initiative. Econometrica 79 (5), 1357–1406.
Kaboski, J.P., Townsend, R.M., 2012. The impact of credit on village economies. Am.

Econ. J.: Appl. Econ. 4 (2), 98–133.

Kaplan, L.J., Matteis, S., 1968. The economics of loansharking. Am. J. Econ. Sociol. 27

(3), 239–252.

Koijen, R.S.J., Yogo, M., 2016. Shadow insurance. Econometrica 84 (3), 1265–1287.
Lang, K., Leong, K., Li, H., Xu, H., 2022. Borrowing in an illegal market: Contracting

Allard, T., 2019. The Hunt for Asia’s El Chapo. Reuters.

with loan sharks. Rev. Econ. Stat. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_01246.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389420K. Leong et al.

Leong, K., Li, H., Rysman, M., Walsh, C., 2022. Law enforcement and bargaining over
illicit drug prices: Structural evidence from a Gang’s ledger. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc.
20 (3), 1198–1230.

Levi, M., Reuter, P., 2006. Money laundering. Crime Justice 34, 289–375.
Limodio, N., 2022. Terrorism financing, recruitment, and attacks. Econometrica 90 (4),

Payne, B., Murray, C., Morrow, D., Byrne, J., 2020. Illegal Money Lending and Debt

Project. Research Report of Findings - Ulster University.

Romeo, C., Sandler, R., 2021. The effect of debt collection laws on access to credit. J.

Public Econ. 195, 104320.

Ryan, S.P., 2012. The costs of environmental regulation in a concentrated industry.

1711–1742.

Econometrica 80 (3), 1019–1061.

Maimbo, S.M., Henriquez, C.A., 2014. Interest rate caps around the world: Still popular,
but a blunt instrument. Policy Research Working Paper 7070, World Bank Group,
Washington, DC.

Savona, E.U., Riccardi, M., 2015. From Illegal Markets to Legitimate Businesses: The
Portfolio of Organized Crime in Europe. Report for the European Commission -
Directorate-General Home Affairs.

Marinaro, I.C., 2017. Loan-sharking in a time of crisis: Lessons from rome’s illegal

Schneider, F., 2013. The financial flows of transnational crime and tax fraud in OECD

credit market. Trends Organ. Crime 20, 196–215.

Melzer, B., 2011. The real costs of credit access: Evidence from the payday lending

market. Q. J. Econ. 126 (1), 517–555.

Melzer, B.T., 2018. Spillovers from costly credit. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (9), 3568–3594.
Morse, A., 2011. Payday lenders: Heroes or villains? J. Financ. Econ. 102, 28–44.
Nelson, S., 2023. Private information and price regulation in the US credit card market.

Working Paper.

News, C., 2021a. Crime thai police take down huge Chinese illegal online lending net-
work. Chiang Rai Times, URL https://www.chiangraitimes.com/crime/thai-police-
take-down-huge-chinese-illegal-online-lending-network/.

News, C., 2021b. Thailand’s immigration police take down foreign loan shark
gang. Chiang Rai Times, URL https://www.chiangraitimes.com/thailand-national-
news/news-asia-thailand/thailands-immigration-police-take-down-foreign-loan-
shark-gang/.

countries: What do we (not) know? Public Finance Rev. 41 (5), 677–707.
Singapore High Court, 2012. Ong Chee Eng v Public Prosecutor [2012] SGHC 115.
Soudijn, M.R., Zhang, S.X., 2013. Taking loan sharking into account: A case study of
Chinese vest-pocket lenders in Holland. Trends Organ. Crime 16 (1), 13–30.

Stegman, M., 2007. Payday lending. J. Econ. Perspect. 21 (1), 169–190.
Temin, P., Voth, H.-J., 2008. Interest rate restrictions in a natural experiment: Loan
allocation and the change in the Usury laws in 1714. Econom. J. 118 (528),
743–758.

Tencent News, 2021.

loan
and violent collection personnel. Tencent News, URL https://new.qq.com/omn/
20211018/20211018A0DNG200.html.

Indonesian police arrested a large number of

illegal

Thang, Q., 2020. Chinese loan sharks caught charging monthly interest of 90 percent.
VN Express, URL https://e.vnexpress.net/news/news/chinese-loan-sharks-caught-
charging-monthly-interest-of-90-percent-4087766.html.

JournalofFinancialEconomics159(2024)10389421